
	
	
		
IntroductionThe development of an automation system for assisting terminal area air traffic controllers in efficiently managing and controlling arrival traffic has long been an objective of researchers and engineers.A fundamental issue for researchers in the development of such automation tools is to build functionalities and user interfaces that enhance the air traffic controllers' ability to perform well in their job.Early efforts in the automation of terminal air traffic control was presented by Martin and Willett (1968).Their system provided speed and heading advisories to controllers to help increase spacing efficiency on final approach.Although traffic tests of the system showed an increase in landing rate, controllers found that their workload was increased and rejected the system (Martin and Willett, 1968).An examination of the concept suggests that while some aspects of the design were sound, its acceptance was limited by the technology of the time period, especially the lack of an adequate controller interface.More recently, however, several automation systems have found their way into operational use in Europe due in large part to the introduction of modern computer processing and interfaces, and also because of more careful design approaches (Volckers, 1990;Garcia, 1990).In addition, recent real-time simulation studies have confirmed the potential for increasing landing rates *Sterling Software, Inc., Palo Alto, California.with the assistance of active advisories for controllers in the terminal area (Davis et al., 1991;Credeur et al., 1993).A candidate system for the automated management and control of terminal area traffic, referred to as the Center TRACON Automation System (CTAS), is under development at NASA Ames Research Center in collaboration with the Federal Aviation Administration's (FAA's)
Terminal Air Traffic Control Automation ProgramOffice.The elements comprising the CTAS are the Traffic Management Advisor (TMA), the Descent Advisor (DA), and the Final Approach Spacing Tool (FAST) (Erzberger et al., 1993).The advisories generated by these tools assist controllers in handling aircraft arrivals starting at about 200 n.mi.from the airport and continuing to the final approach fix.Recently, the elements of the CTAS system have been evaluated in a series of real-time simulations at NASA Ames ResearchCenter and in field testing at facilities serving the Denver, Colorado, and Dallas/Fort Worth, Texas, areas.This paper describes a cooperative effort between software developers, human factors specialists, and air traffic controllers to develop FAST.The main function of FAST is to provide landing sequence, landing runway assignments, and speed and heading advisories that help controllers manage and control arrival traffic and achieve an accurately spaced flow of that traffic onto the final approach course (Davis et al., 1991;Davis et al., 1994).This paper emphasizes the role of the air traffic controller in FAST development, from providing direction into the controlling strategies incorporated into the FAST algorithms.This paper also describes the use of the Controller Acceptance Rating Scale to track the controllers' perspective of the overall system through the development of FAST.
ControllerInput into FAST Development Center, theFAATechnical Center inAtlantic City, NewJersey, andinevaluation activities attheoperational facilities intowhichtheinitial deployment have been targeted.Theextensive involvement ofcontrollers increases theirunderstanding of thesoftware and engineering constraints, andhelps them tofocus theirexpertiseandprovide input thatismaximally useful tothe software developers (Sanford etal.,1995).Inaddition, earlyend-user involvement alsohelps tointegrate human factors issues during design, whichcanhelpimprove system usability (Small, 1994).Larger questions ofthe suitability ofa system, orhowwellthesystem provides fortheusers' problem-solving requirements (Harwood andSanford, 1993), canalso beaddressed withearly enduser involvement.were also monitored to provide a more complete picture of the traffic flow and decision-making activities.
Phases of Controller Involvement
Phase l: On-Site ControllersThe first level of FAST development involved creating a system prototype in which new functionality was first tested and graphical user interfaces were generated.Simulations were conducted several days a week with on-site controllers, most of whom were retired from regional facilities in the San Francisco Bay Area.Feedback from this early testing helped direct the iterative development of FAST.The simulations with the on-site controllers enabled the developers to gauge the software's performance under basic, day-to-day testing conditions.The on-site controllers provided an indication of how air traffic controllers as a whole would react to the displays, controlling strategies, and advisories incorporated into the software.From a human factors standpoint, they provided the most input at the level of FAST's usability, determining if basic information could be extracted under simulated operations.They also provided some input on suitability issues, evaluating whether the information provided by FAST was appropriate for its intended use.In addition, the researchers benefited from on-site controller participation in that they were able to conduct studies under fairly well-defined conditions to determine the impact of FAST on controller workload.These studies showed that FAST reduced the level of self-reported workload by the air traffic controller (Lee et al., 1995) as well as reducing the number of commands issued to aircraft (Slattery et al., 1995).Split of FAST functionality-One of the SDT's pivotal inputs into FAST development was to split FAST functionality into two parts.FAST was originally conceived to provide a suite of advisory information for the TRACON sector controllers.This information would enable the TRACON controller to efficiently sequence and space arrival traffic by providing sequence and runway advisories.In addition, speeds and headings were provided to efficiently meet the sequences and runway assignments.Following an early evaluation, the SDT recommended that FAST be split into "passive" and "active" stages.Passive FAST was the portion of the software that provided only the sequence and runway advisory information and Active FAST was the portion where speed and heading advisories would be added.Together with the developers, the SDT decided that Passive FAST would be tested first.In the early months of FAST development, the SDT was very cautious toward FAST and their recommendation to test Passive FAST first was directly attributable to this cautious attitude.It is possible that when the SDT first began to evaluate FAST, the utility of the FAST advisories was not fully developed, and hence the benefits were not as obvious as they have become.However, the SDT's acceptance of FAST increased significantly in the three years of their involvement in FAST development, and as a number of their concerns outside the software's capability (described below) were raised and addressed.Shadowing observations were a key turning point in the SDT's assessment of the software; they became an evaluation environment in which the benefits of FAST advisories became very evident.Figure 3  required.In order to conduct such a test, a larger group, or assessment team, of DFW controllers needed to be assembled and made proficient in using FAST.
Phase III: Assessment TeamThe Assessment Team was composed of six controllers (three from each specialty) and two area supervisors from DFW TRACON.The Assessment Team participated in simulations at NASA Ames and the FAA Technical Center and will be participating in the upcoming Limited Operational Demonstration at DFW.The Assessment Team brought a wider range of skill, expectations, and viewpoints to the FAST development process.In their initial introduction to FAST, some of the Assessment Team members were pleasantly surprised and impressed that FAST could increase their throughput capacity without making them feel taxed.Others felt that they operated quite well without the need for added automation.As with the SDT, the developers had to work with the Assessment Team to come to an understanding of where the benefits of FAST's advisories and strategies could be realized.While the Assessment Team also introduced new controlling strategies not previously encountered, they also saw the benefits of changing their controlling strategies in the operational environment based on what they had seen in FAST simulations.The Assessment Team's main goal was to determine when FAST would be ready for a limited operational test.But because developing ATC automation with active controller input was a new process within the FAA, there were no established guidelines to help determine system readiness and acceptability.Furthermore, the benchmarks of acceptability from the developer's perspective did not sufficiently address the controller's sense of workload.It was clear that qualitative measures of workload and acceptance had to be assessed along with quantitative measures of reduced delay and increased runway throughput.The Controller Acceptance Rating Scale (CARS)Based on the need for a measure of acceptability, the Controller Acceptance Rating Scale (CARS) was developed by the human factors specialists (fig.4).The CARS was an adaptation of the Cooper-Harper Rating Scale for pilot assessment of handling qualities of aircraft (Cooper and Harper, 1969).CARS is still being assessed and validated at NASA Ames.The original Cooper-Harper scale measured the performance of the pilot and the vehicle working together;this merging of the pilot and the vehicle defined the system being evaluated (Harper and Cooper, 1986).In adapting this scale to the ATC environment, this concept of a system including the user, the software, and the hardware was preserved.In addition, changes were made to the scale layout itself: compared to the original Cooper-Harper scale, the scale was reordered so that a rating of "!" was the worst performance level, and "10" was the highest performance level.This change was made to reflect that a lower number was to be associated with a lower, less acceptable rating, and the higher number was to be associated with a higher, more acceptable rating.CARS was intended to provide the Assessment Team with a means for determining how well they and the FAST software performed together in controlling traffic in simulation.Following a simulation, each of the Assessment Team controllers viewed the scale, produced a rating, and gave an explanation for the rating.In addition, they were asked to provide a confidence indication of their rating, which could incorporate issues of the fidelity of the simulation, the amount of information they had available to make their rating, and other issues that might be external to the software advisories.The four main rating levels described by CARS were controllability, tolerability, satisfaction, and acceptability.The controllers started at the top of the CARS diagram and first determined if the system was controllable.An uncontrollable system would imply safety violations such as near misses, collisions, or an inability to maintain separation.Such a system would require mandatory improvements.If the system was rated as controllable, the controller then assessed the next level: tolerability.
Concluding RemarksThe FAST development was a collaborative effort between air traffic controllers, developers, and human factors specialists.The development proceeded with increasing levels of expertise and complexity.The concept was first developed by engineers, then tested with retired controllers to gain early data on controller acceptability.Once this initial phase demonstrated benefits both to the controller and the air traffic control system, expert controllers from the initial deployment facility were introduced to gain specific expertise for the FAST system.These expert controllers drove the system development toward a usable system for their facility through real-time simulation and by shadowing live traffic operations with the FAST system.Finally, after a high degree of system fidelity was reached, a controller assessment team for the initial deployment site was brought into the final phases of development in order to prepare for an operational test.The assessment team controllers contributed to the final tuning of the system through real-time simulation and through the use of a new Controller Acceptance Rating Scale.The complexity in developing automation aids for ATC is due to more than the complexity of modeling ATC strategies.The successful introduction of automation aids into the air traffic control environment must consider the impact on the air traffic controller in the form of changes to controlling strategies, workload, and job satisfaction.Early controller involvement helps to identify such concerns at a stage when changes to the software and education for the controller and developer can easily take place.In addition, early controller involvement helps to increase acceptance, which is the key measure of the software's Success.
If the controllers'input is delayed until the end of the software development process, their sense of involvement is diminished and their operational concerns are likely to be ignored because of the inability to accommodate changes at later stages of development.In addition, preventing controllers from making inputs until the later stages of development assumes that the developers have anticipated all problems and that the facility doesn't need any time to grow accustomed to potentially large changes to the nature of its work.San Diego, Calif., 1990, pp. 496-501.FigureFigure 1 .1Figure 1 shows the development of FAST through varying levels of development milestones and controller involvement.This paper concentrates on the three phases of controller involvement in simulation, from the initial software development to the preparation for the operational test.Three different controller teams participated in the three levels of simulation fidelity.Each group of controllers provided increasingly more refined information in their evaluations.The first level, which required the initial assessment of new functionality and new displays, utilized the expertise of a group of local, retired controllers and pilots.The second level focused on expanded functionality and site-specific issues and incorporated the participation of a small cadre of controllers, or System Development Team (SDT), who represented the DFW facility.The third level increased the amount of feedback and input into refining the FAST functionality and determined levels of acceptability for limited field testing, utilizing the expertise of a larger group of controllers from DFW.
It was clear, ho_ev_, that the development of FAST functionality soon required more specific input from the DFW TRACON controllers, once basic concepts of air traffic control (ATC) were incorporated in the software.The on-site controllers' input into basic ATC concerns and attitudes was often accurate, but their understanding of the operations at the DFW TRACON was limited.As a result, the SDT was brought into the development process.Phase II: System Development Team The second phase of FAST development incorporated the expertise of a cadre of three controllers, one area supervisor, and one training specialist from the DFW TRACON.These controllers formed the SDT.The SDT provided the developers with guidance about the specific procedures of the operational environment and an understanding of operations under the high traffic levels that are common to DFW.The SDT participated in formal software evaluations at NASA Ames and the FAA Technical Center approximately every 6 to 8 weeks, depending upon milestones in the software design.
+Figure 3 .3Figure 3. Shadowing observations demonstrating uneven runway balancing.
air traffic controller with the aeronautical engineer in developing ATC software helps to produce a system that will capture as much of the actual complexity of ATC as is possible prior to final field deployment.The process for incorporating air traffic controllers in the development of FAST allowed the FAST engineers to achieve a greater understanding and appreciation of the overall task of air traffic control, and helped them to create the most effective algorithms for generating efficient sequences and runway assignments.This process also allowed the controllers to become involved in understanding the software and engineering constraints under which the development occurred and helped provide focus in their feedback to the developers.Such a cooperative design approach was mutually beneficial to the controller and the engineer as both parties were able to satisfactorily understand each other's needs throughout development.Early involvement of the air traffic controller was also extremely valuable for addressing human factors issues.The early and continuous involvement of controllers allowed interface and suitability issues to be tested and implemented throughout development.Issues such as information extraction, the assessment of workload, and, especially, the assessment of controller acceptance were able to be accommodated throughout development when changes could be made easily.Measurements taken by instruments such as the CARS have provided valuable insight into acceptance issues and also provided direction to the controllers on how to evaluate the system in the absence of outside guidelines.By implementing the process described in this paper, the controllers have become more than just end-users awaiting a product.They are actively a part of the development of FAST and they clearly have demonstrated their enthusiasm for its success.Their active participation has contributed to the FAA's continued awareness and support of CTAS development.In addition, the controllers have become strong advocates of FAST in their facility, working to promote FAST as a beneficial addition to the controller's tools.Once the controllers themselves were satisfied that FAST was going to benefit the facility, and was not intended to replace the controller, they were able to provide reassurance to the facility that the concerns over job satisfaction and workload were being taken into consideration.Clearly, the input of controllers from the deployment site in early stages of development will be critical for upcoming operational testing.The controllers provided the developers with cues toward the overall facility culture, and have helped to prepare the facility for the introduction of new technology.
requires considerable compensation to achieve adequate performance. Minor but annoying deficiencies. Desired performance requires moderate controller compensation. Only mildly unpleasant deficiencies. System is acceptable and minimal compensation needed to meet desired performance. General agreement with advisories. Use of passive FAST enhances performance. Negligible deficiencies• System is acceptable, and compensation not a factor to achieve desired performance. Overall agreement with advisories. Significantly enhances performance.Improvement Mandatory.Safe operation could not be Major deficiencies.System is barely controllable and only with extreme controller compensation.Advisories must be ignored and are often not trustworthy.NoI Improvement Mandatory_J-_ maintained using passive FAST advisories.YesNo_Adequate |performance not |achievable with |tolerable workload |levels. DeficienciesMajor deficiencies. System is marginally controllable, Considerable compensation is needed by the controller. Advisodes are not always trustworthy._are unreasonable ,Major deficiencies. System Is controllable. Advisoriesdo not compromise safety. Some compensation needed tomaintain safe operations. Adequate performance notattainable.Very objectionable deficiencies. Maintaining adequateperformance requires extensive controller compensation.Noneeded.Moderately objectionable deficiencies. Use of passiveYes Determine system acceptability.Improvement Deficiencies warrant further improvement I System is acceptable1FAST Deficiencies are rare. System is acceptable, and controllerdoes not have to compensate to achieve desired10performance. Nearly 100% agreement with advisories,Provide ConfidenceRating,Figure 4. Controller AcceptanceRating Scale.an inabilityto achieveadequateperformancewith toler-simulationswith varied runwayconfigurationstypical toable workloadlevels. If the systemwas rated as tolerable,DFW operations.Each controllerwho participatedin athis implieda reasonableworkloadwith manageablesimulationrated the systembased on his own experiencedeficiencies,and the controllerthen assessedthe nextworkingtraffic from his particularsector position.level: satisfaction.An unsatisfactoryrating impliedthatBecauseCARS data have been collectedfrom only onethe deficiencieswarrantedimprovement.If the systemseries of simulations,resultsare not presentedhere. Inwas consideredsatisfactory,however,the controllerthensubsequentsimulationsand operationaltesting,the devel-rated the level of acceptabilitythe systemwas able toopers intend to continueto use CARSin order to track theachievein the simulation.A confidencerating wasprogressof the softwareevaluationby the controllers.obtainedfollowingthe numericalrating. The AssessmentCARShas indicationsof being a useful measurementTeam was quite receptiveto CARS.device,and its validationwill be useful to other ATCTo date, CARShas been used for one AssessmentTeamsoftwaredevelopmentprocesses.evaluation,in which the controllersparticipatedin sevenIf the system was rated as intolerable, this implied major deficiencies and
		
		
			
REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGEForm Approved OMB No.Historically, the development of advanced automation for air traffic control in the United States has excluded the input of the air traffic controller until the end of the development process.In contrast, the development of the Final Approach Spacing Tool (FAST), for the terminal area controller, has incorporated the end-user in early, iterative testing.This paper describes a cooperation between the controller and the developer to create a tool which incorporates the complexity of the air traffic controller's job.This approach to software development has enhanced the usability of FAST and has helped smooth the introduction of FAST into the operational environment.
SUBJECT TERMS			
			

				


	
		
			GECooper
		
		
			RPHarper
		
		The Use of Pilot Rating in the Evaluation of Aircraft Handling Qualities. NASA TN D-5153
		Washington, D.C.
		
			1969
		
	
	Cooper, G. E.; and Harper, R. P.: The Use of Pilot Rating in the Evaluation of Aircraft Handling Qualities. NASA TN D-5153, Washington, D.C., 1969.



	
		A Comparison of Final Approach Spacing Aids for Terminal ATC Automation
		
			LeonardCredeur
		
		
			WilliamRCapron
		
		
			DanielJCrawford
		
		
			WilliamGRodgers
		
		
			GaryWLohr
		
		
			DershuenATang
		
		10.2514/atcq.1.2.135
		NASA TP-3399
	
	
		Air Traffic Control Quarterly
		Air Traffic Control Quarterly
		1064-3818
		2472-5757
		
			1
			2
			
			1993
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA)
		
	
	Credeur, L.; Capron, W. R.; Lohr, G. W.; Crawford, D. J.; Tang, D. A.; and Rodgers, W. G.: Final-Approach Spacing Aids (FASA) Evaluation for Terminal-Area, Time-Based Air Traffic Control, NASA TP-3399, 1993.



	
		Design and evaluation of an air traffic control Final Approach Spacing Tool
		
			ThomasJDavis
		
		
			HeinzErzberger
		
		
			StevenMGreen
		
		
			WilliamNedell
		
		10.2514/3.20721
	
	
		Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics
		Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics
		0731-5090
		1533-3884
		
			14
			4
			
			1991
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA)
		
	
	Davis, T. J.; Erzberger, H.; Green, S. M.; and Nedell, W.: Design and Evaluation of an Air Traffic Control Final Approach Spacing Tool. J. Guidance Control and Dynamics, vol. 14, 1991, pp. 848-854.



	
		THE FINAL APPROACH SPACING TOOL
		
			TJDavis
		
		
			KJKrzeczowski
		
		
			CBergh
		
		10.1016/b978-0-08-042238-1.50015-x
	
	
		Automatic Control in Aerospace 1994 (Aerospace Control '94)
		
			Elsevier
			
			
		
	
	Davis, T. J.; Krzeczowski;



	
		The Final Approach Spacing Tool
		
			KJBergh
		
		
			C
		
	
	
		Proceedings of the 13th IFAC Symposium on Automatic Control in Aerospace-Aerospace Control '94
		the 13th IFAC Symposium on Automatic Control in Aerospace-Aerospace Control '94Palo Alto, Calif
		
			1994
			
		
	
	K. J.; and Bergh, C.: The Final Approach Spacing Tool. In: Proceedings of the 13th IFAC Symposium on Automatic Control in Aerospace-Aerospace Control '94, Palo Alto, Calif., 1994, pp. 70-76.



	
		Design of Center-TRACON Automation System
		
			HErzberger
		
		
			TJDavis
		
		
			SMGreen
		
	
	
		Proceedings of the AGARD Guidance and Control Panel 56th Symposium on Machine Intelligence in Air Traffic Management
		the AGARD Guidance and Control Panel 56th Symposium on Machine Intelligence in Air Traffic ManagementBerlin, Germany
		
			1993
			
		
	
	Erzberger, H.; Davis, T. J.; and Green, S. M.: Design of Center-TRACON Automation System. In: Proceed- ings of the AGARD Guidance and Control Panel 56th Symposium on Machine Intelligence in Air Traffic Management, Berlin, Germany, 1993, pp. I I-1-11-12.



	
		MAESTRO - A Metering and Spacing Tool
		
			Jean - LouisGarcia
		
		10.23919/acc.1990.4790786
	
	
		1990 American Control Conference
		San Diego, Calif
		
			IEEE
			1990
			
		
	
	Garcia, J.: MAESTRO---A Metering and Spacing Tool. In: Proceedings of the 1990 American Control Conference, San Diego, Calif., 1990, pp. 501-507.



	
		Handling qualities and pilot evaluation
		
			RobertPHarper
		
		
			GeorgeECooper
		
		10.2514/3.20142
	
	
		Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics
		Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics
		0731-5090
		1533-3884
		
			9
			5
			
			1986
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA)
		
	
	Harper, R. P.; and Cooper, G. E.: Handling Qualities and Pilot Evaluation. J. Guidance, vol. 9, 1986, pp. 515-529.



	
		Human Factors Certification of Advanced Aviation Technologies
		
			KHarwood
		
		
			BDSanford
		
		J. A. Wise, V. D. Hopkin, and P. Stager
		
			Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University Press
		
	
	Evaluation in Context: ATC Automation in the Field
	Harwood, K.; and Sanford, B. D.: Evaluation in Context: ATC Automation in the Field. In: Human Factors Certification of Advanced Aviation Technologies, J. A. Wise, V. D. Hopkin, and P. Stager, eds., Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University Press,



	
		Improved Navigational Technology and Air Traffic Control: A Description of Controller Coordination and Workload
		
			KKLee
		
		
			WSPawlak
		
		
			BDSanford
		
		
			RASlattery
		
	
	
		Proceedings of the Eighth International Symposium on Aviation Psychology
		the Eighth International Symposium on Aviation PsychologyColumbus, Ohio
		
			1995
		
	
	Lee, K. K.; Pawlak, W. S.; Sanford, B. D.; and Slattery, R. A.: Improved Navigational Technology and Air Traffic Control: A Description of Controller Coordination and Workload. In: Proceedings of the Eighth International Symposium on Aviation Psychology, Columbus, Ohio, 1995.



	
		Evaluation of the terminal area precision scheduling and spacing system for near-term NAS application
		
			DAMartin
		
		
			FMWillet
		
		10.1201/b12321-12
		Rept. NA-68-25 (RD-68-16
	
	
		Advances in Human Aspects of Aviation
		
			CRC Press
			Aug. 1968
			
		
	
	Martin, D. A.; and Willet, F. M.: Development and Application of a Terminal Spacing System. Federal Aviation Administration, Rept. NA-68-25 (RD-68-16), Aug. 1968.



	
		Tailoring Advanced Technologies for Air Traffic Control: The Importance of the Development Process
		
			BDSanford
		
		
			KHarwood
		
		
			KKLee
		
	
	
		Proceedings of the Eighth International Symposium on Aviation Psychology
		the Eighth International Symposium on Aviation PsychologyColumbus, Ohio
		
			1995
		
	
	Sanford, B. D.; Harwood, K.; and Lee, K. K.: Tailoring Advanced Technologies for Air Traffic Control: The Importance of the Development Process. In: Pro- ceedings of the Eighth International Symposium on Aviation Psychology, Columbus, Ohio, 1995.



	
		Comparison of pilot variations following terminal area trajectories
		
			RhondaSlattery
		
		
			BeverlySanford
		
		
			KatharineLee
		
		
			KatharineLee
		
		
			BeverlySanford
		
		
			RhondaSlattery
		
		10.2514/6.1997-3690
	
	
		Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			
		
	
	Slattery, R. A.; Lee, K. K.; and Sanford, B. D.: Effects


				
			
		
	
