
	
	
		
NASA STI Program. . . in ProfileSince its founding, NASA has been dedicated to the advancement of aeronautics and space science.The NASA scientific and technical information (STI) program plays a key part in helping NASA maintain this important role.The NASA STI Program operates under the auspices of the Agency Chief Information Officer.It collects, organizes, provides for archiving, and disseminates NASA's STI.The NASA STI Program provides access to the NASA Aeronautics and Space Database and its public interface, the NASA Technical Report Server, thus providing one of the largest collection of aeronautical and space science STI in the world.Results are published in both non-NASA channels and by NASA in the NASA STI Report Series, which includes the following report types:• TECHNICAL PUBLICATION.Reports of completed research or a major significant phase of research that present the results of NASA programs and include extensive data or theoretical analysis.Includes compilations of significant scientific and technical data and information deemed to be of continuing reference value.NASA counterpart of peer-reviewed formal professional papers, but having less stringent limitations on manuscript length and extent of graphic presentations.• TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM.Scientific and technical findings that are preliminary or of specialized interest, e.g., quick release reports, working papers, and bibliographies that contain minimal annotation.Does not contain extensive analysis.• CONTRACTOR REPORT.Scientific and technical findings by NASA-sponsored contractors and grantees.• CONFERENCE PUBLICATION.Collected papers from scientific and technical conferences, symposia, seminars, or other meetings sponsored or co-sponsored by NASA.• SPECIAL PUBLICATION.Scientific, technical, or historical information from NASA programs, projects, and missions, often concerned with subjects having substantial public interest.• TECHNICAL TRANSLATION.Englishlanguage translations of foreign scientific and technical material pertinent to NASA's mission.Specialized services also include organizing and publishing research results, distributing specialized research announcements and feeds, providing information desk and personal search support, and enabling data exchange services.For more information about the NASA STI Program, see the following:• Access the NASA STI program home page at http://www.sti.nasa.gov• E-mail your question to help@sti.nasa.gov• Phone the NASA STI Information Desk at 757-864-9658   surveillance, or radar.Manned aircraft traffic is projected on constant-velocity trajectories to a look-ahead time of 180 seconds.DAIDALUS provides discrete alert levels for all nearby traffic based on time to intersection of a given alert zone.These alerts align with alerting definitions defined in the Phase 1 DAA MOPS with buffered volumes and timelines.DAIDAlUS's guidance is of a suggestive nature in that it indicates a range of maneuvers (and non-maneuvers) that would lead to conflicts, without dictating a single maneuver for the pilot to follow.The types of maneuver include heading, altitude, climb rate, and airspeed for corrective and warning alert types as well as guidance to regain WC if a Loss of Well Clear (LoWC) is unavoidable [6].All possible maneuvers within the UAS's performance are calculated at a given time step to detect maneuver regions that would result in a LoWC with projected traffic within the look-ahead time.Figure 2 summarizes DAIDALUS's high-level design principles.Figure 2. DAIDALUS alert and guidance design principles [6] The Aircraft Collision Avoidance System X (ACAS-X) [7] is envisioned by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to be a critical component that supports the safety of the Next-Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen).ACAS-X will replace the currently deployed Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance System II (TCAS-II) [8] in the near future.The UAS-variant of ACAS-X, called ACAS-Xu, is currently under development.Recently, ACAS-Xu's capability has been extended from the collision avoidance time regime to longer look-ahead times so as to provide DAA alert and guidance.This extension aims at meeting the DAA functional requirement defined by the Phase 1 MOPS.In contrast to the deterministic approach used by DAIDALUS, ACAS-Xu uses cost analysis, dynamic programming, and probabilistic state distributions to calculate alerting statistics and guidance.ACAS-Xu represents aircraft states and dynamics non-deterministically [9].Aircraft and sensor models are applied to surveillance data sources to develop probability distributions of aircraft states.The Surveillance and Tracking Module (STM) correlates and associates aircraft states as well as their probability distributions.These state distributions are applied to pre-calculated dynamic programming tables to estimate relevant alerting information, such as time to LoWC or Near Mid-Air Collision (NMAC).The Threat Resolution Module (TRM) then uses a combination of state distributions and statistical output from dynamic programming to select the best maneuver based on several cost factors [7,10].Both systems interact with the pilot in a combination of alerts and suggestive guidance.ACAS-Xu also issues directive guidance called Resolution Advisories (RA), indicating the severity, sense, and strength of a necessary maneuver.These RAs can occur in horizontal, vertical, or mixed type maneuvers as selected by the Nucleus module [7].Complimentary to RAs, ACAS-Xu's suggestive guidance is calculated in the horizontal dimension, indicating ranges of headings that the PIC should avoid to prevent a LoWC in the near future.This report compares the DAA alerting and guidance performance of DAIDALUS and ACAS-Xu algorithms using flight test data flown with scripted encounters.The performance of both systems is also measured against the Phase 1 MOPS for alerting and guidance.The results reveal striking similarities and some differences between the two systems, and can inform further development of both.
MethodsThe comparison in this work uses flight test data flown with scripted encounters.ACAS-Xu alerting and guidance data were generated and collected in real time during the flight test.DAIDALUS alerting and guidance data were generated after the flight test, by processing the flight test collected aircraft data through DAIDALUS.The following sub-sections describe the data generation and collection processes in detail.
ACAS-Xu Flight Test 2ACAS-Xu Flight Test 2 (FT2) was conducted between June and August of 2017 over Edwards Air Force Base in order to test new capabilities implemented in ACAS-X Run 3. A total of 250 scripted encounters were flown.A small percentage of these encounters were flown with the intention to test the new DAA alerting and guidance capabilities.These DAA additions included suggestive and directive horizontal maneuver guidance to meet DAA corrective alert timelines.This work analyzes data from a total of seven of the 250 encounters, including six of the mitigated DAA encounters and one unmitigated (fly-through), not-DAA-specific encounter.Table 1 shows test cards for these seven encounters.Test cards with the prefix RWC were designed to test new DAA capabilities in ACAS-Xu Run 3.Among these encounters, RWC-03, RWC-12, and DA-62 were head-on (with a safety horizontal offset), RWC-09 and RWC-18 were at a 90 degree angle, and RWC-06, and RWC-15 were at a 45-degree angle.Test card DA-62 was included in order to examine the behavior of the DAA systems in an unmitigated scenario where a LoWC occurs.Among the six RWC encounters, RWC-03, RWC-06, and RWC-09 were flown with ACAS-Xu configured in the DAA Mode, whereas RWC-12, RWC-15, and RWC-18 were flown with ACAS-Xu configured in the Policy Mode.The DAA Mode was meant to capture the DAA caution alert and advisories times defined by the MOPS, whereas the Policy mode was for the unadulterated ACAS Xu alert and advisory time.Table 1.ACAS-Xu FT2 Scripted Flight Parameters [11] The seven encounters were flown with the three geometries outlined in Figure 3.Each encounter involved one UAS and a small manned utility aircraft similarly equipped to the UAS, running ACAS-Xa [7] and TCAS II [8].These UAS and manned aircraft are referred to as "Ownship" and "Intruder", respectively, throughout this analysis.The Ownship for each test was a Mode-S and ADS-B equipped Ikhana Predator-B UAS running ACAS-Xu controlled by a test pilot on the ground.During these encounters, ACAS-Xu perceived Ownship to be unable to maneuver vertically, consequently only horizontal guidance was calculated, and tracks were produced from the ACAS Surveillance and Tracking Module (STM) correlation tracker with an ADS-B transceiver as its source.RWC encounters were mitigated, as the Ownship pilot was instructed to follow ACAS-Xu corrective guidance after a response delay timer had expired.The DA-62 encounter had similar geometric and equipage parameters to those with the RWC prefix, but Ownship was not perceived to have limited maneuverability and RA dimension was determined by the ACAS-X Nucleus module.
Flight Data ProcessingThis analysis was conducted using data recorded from the ACAS-Xu FT2 flight test.Surveillance data, Ownship states, and ACAS-Xu output were recorded onboard the Ownship, downlinked, and recorded via the Live Virtual Constructive Distributed Environment (LVC DE) interface.These LVC DE messages included absolute aircraft states for all traffic including Ownship, updated at 1 Hz, and ACAS-Xu guidance and alerting data payloads.DAIDALUS alerting and guidance was produced by feeding the LVC DE messages to DAIDALUS in a post-processing fashion.DAIDALUS requires that traffic states be aligned to Ownship time steps.To support this, blocks of traffic states were linearly interpolated forward in-track to Ownship time assuming constant velocity.This simple "last block" linear interpolation technique produced only modest errors in position, 97 ft from GPS location on average (see Figure 4).
DAIDALUS SimulationThe behavior of DAIDALUS is highly configurable.Alerting thresholds, hazard zone parameters, and perceived aircraft performance can be configured to support different analysis scenarios.For this analysis, a standard configuration file2 designed to be MOPS compliant with a 3-degree-per-second turn rate was applied.This configuration defines three alert zones-preventive, corrective, and warning-in increasing severity.Only the corrective and warning alerts are investigated in this work.Both alert zones were buffered to a 1-nmi Horizontal Miss Distance threshold (HMD*), with 60 and 30 second time to alert thresholds to corrective and warning alert zones respectively.Additionally, guidance to regain Well Clear was calculated The DAIDALUS algorithm is provided as an open-source library3 maintained in Java and C++ versions.This analysis was conducted using DAIDALUS release V-1.0.1-FormalATM-v2.6.2.A basic framework for controlling DAIDALUS was written in MATLAB using the DAIDALUS Java library.This framework was used to calculate guidance and alerting statistics from input scenario files generated from flight test data.
AnalysisDAA systems interact with the UAS pilot by displaying multi-level alerting and suggestive guidance information.The latter is based on the outcome of a range of maneuvers that the pilot should avoid, generally referred to as bands.These bands change severity based on an intruder's alert level and predicted time to intersection of an alert zone.Once the warning bands are saturated (meaning imminent loss of DWC) it is necessary for a DAA system to provide a range of maneuvers (recovery bands) that the PIC can maneuver to in order to regain DWC as soon as possible.Alerting and maneuver guidance performance and statistics of ACAS-Xu are compared against DAIDALUS.
AlertingThe Phase 1 DAA MOPS defines alerting requirements using the Hazard Zone and non-Hazard Zone (see Table 2).Appendix A describes their definitions in detail.Phase 1 DAA MOPS outlines required performance for a DAA system applied to the test vectors outlined in Appendix P of the DAA MOPS [1].The MOPS requires that a DAA system provide corrective and warning level alerts at an average of 55 and 25 seconds before intersection of the corrective and warning hazard zones respectively.The MOPS, nonetheless, does not dictate a specific way of alerting algorithm implementation.This performance of DAIDALUS and ACAS-Xu in the analyzed scenarios is referenced to performance benchmarks outlined within the MOPS.DAIDALUS calculates alerts based on the predicted time to intersection of an alert zone by a projected intruder.The alert zone is chosen to be slightly larger than the alert's Hazard Zone to account for sensor and trajectory uncertainties.Appendix A describes the DAIDALUS alert zone parameters in detail.If this volume is to be violated within a specified minimum time an alert for that volume is presented with the highest level alert taking priority.Figure 5 shows the alerting and guidance timelines of ACAS-Xu and DAIDALUS.The version of ACAS-Xu analyzed here provides two levels of alert, Remain Well Clear (RWC) and Collision Avoidance (CA).ACAS-Xu's collision avoidance alerts are provided on similar timelines to TCAS II.The horizontal DAA additions to ACAS-Xu are designed to extend these timelines to support look-ahead times applicable to DAA requirements.The new DAA alert, the RWC alert, is expected to be issued at approximately the same time as the start of a DAA corrective alert threshold.It continues to be issued during the progression of an encounter until either the conflict is cleared or a CA alert is issued.DAIDALUS, on the other hand, provides discrete alerts for each DAA threshold and Regain-WC guidance calculated at approximately the DAA WC threshold.To facilitate comparison, the two ACAS-Xu alert levels are mapped to the corrective and warning alert levels for DAIDALUS, respectively (see Table 3.) It is important Figure 5. ACAS-Xu and DAIDALUS Alerting Timelines [10] to note that ACAS-Xu CA alert is not intended to provide DAA warning level alerts.The comparison between ACAS-Xu Collision Avoidance and DAA warning is imperfect as these refer to the alerts pertaining to NMAC and intersection of the warning hazard zone respectively.As such it is not expected that ACAS-Xu meet Phase 1 DAA warning thresholds requirements in alerting or guidance.Phase 2 of the DAA MOPS is expected to address the RWC guidance techniques used by ACAS-Xu in separate requirements for the proven robust ACAS-X method.
Maneuver GuidanceOnly horizontal DAA guidance is compared between the two systems as the DAA vertical guidance of ACAS-Xu has not been implemented in Run 3. Inclusion of DAA guidance in the vertical dimension is planned for future releases of ACAS-Xu.Figure 7 shows the maneuver guidance for test card RWC-12.Horizontal maneuver guidance bands, in corrective and warning severities, with respect to Ownship heading are plotted along the Y-axis and time elapsed from the beginning of the test card along the X-axis.Negative headings correspond to left turns while positive headings correspond to right turns.These plots for test RWC-12 are representative of maneuver guidance performance observed across all scenarios.Similar plots for the remaining six scenarios can be found in Appendix B.It was observed that DAIDALUS's corrective guidance and ACAS-Xu's RWC guidance occur within 3 to 5 seconds of each other in the same region.ACAS-Xu was DAIDALUS produced warning level bands at 81 seconds elapsed, approximately 30 seconds before LoWC.ACAS-Xu produced smaller CA bands in the same regions 15 seconds later on average than DAIDALUS and later than the average DAA warning alert threshold.This is consistent with the onset delay in the warning-level alerts reported in Section 3.1.CA bands calculated by ACAS-Xu were consistently 25 to 35 degrees smaller than those calculated by DAIDALUS before saturation.Interesting behavior of ACAS-Xu's corrective level guidance bands is seen in several scenarios, including RWC-12 in Figure 7. Between approximately 75 and 90 seconds elapsed in RWC-12, ACAS-Xu's corrective bands were saturated in both directions, no directive CA heading was calculated, and no horizontal RA's were produced.During these 15 seconds there was no positive (i.e., recommended) guidance presented to the PIC.This indicates that there were no actions that the PIC could take in order to maintain or regain separation.This is in contrast to DAIDALUS's guidance bands which indicate possible maneuvers to the right and left during these times.Phase 1 DAA MOPS specifies that a DAA system shall always provide positive guidance information unless in the condition of NMAC4  [1].Future versions of ACAS-Xu should address this gap and make sure guidance is always available.
Regain Well-Clear GuidanceIf the Ownship penetrates the RWC alerting zone deep enough, ACAS-Xu calculates horizontal directive guidance in the form of a heading to turn to.The horizontal directive guidance is also called a horizontal resolution advisory (RA).In general, ACAS-Xu may generate both horizontal and vertical resolution advisories.Its Nucleus module decides whether to issue a horizontal, a vertical, or a blended resolution advisory.In the case that a horizontal resolution advisory is issued, the PIC is expected to command the aircraft to these headings in order to maintain separation and avoid NMAC.In contrast, DAIDALUS calculates recovery bands once a loss of Well Clear is unavoidable (with horizontal maneuvers).These recovery bands indicate a range of maneuvers that the PIC should take in order to regain WC in a timely manner.Figure 7 shows the directive guidance of ACAS-Xu starting at 90 seconds, about 20 seconds before DAIDALUS issues the recovery bands.Among the other encounters analyzed, ACAS-Xu calculated CA maneuver guidance about 25 seconds before DAIDALUS issued the recovery bands (see Appendix B).Figure 8 shows the normalized amount of directive guidance headings calculated by ACAS-Xu that agree with DAIDALUS Regain-DWC guidance bands.
Figure 8. Regain Well Clear Guidance OutcomesAgreement is considered to be when ACAS-Xu directive CA headings occur within a DAIDALUS DWC recovery band, or outside of DAIDALUS corrective or warning bands.For quantitative comparison of regain DWC guidance, probability of intersection was calculated as the ratio of headings in agreement to the total number of calculated CA hearings.These headings are agreeable with DAIDALUS guidance, falling within DAIDALUS non-alerting or recovery bands with a 0.87 probability globally and in complete agreement in 5/7 scenarios as seen in the histogram on the left in Figure 8.The right histogram of Figure 8 indicates the frequency of an ACAS-Xu directive CA heading occurring at a given distance to the nearest DIADLUS corrective or warning band edge.ACAS-Xu directive headings appear to deviate minimally from the Ownship's current heading, diverting 25 degrees on average from the nearest DAIDALUS corrective or warning band edge.
Anomalies
Alerting ToggleThe deterministic aircraft model used by DAIDALUS is susceptible to uncertainties in aircraft state data in some situations.Figure 9 shows how DAIDALUS was observed to drop maneuver guidance and decrease alert level due to perceived Intruder vertical divergence.This behavior was observed in all RWC scenarios.These scenarios occurred with Ownship offset vertically 300ft above the intruder.When linearly projected, these intruders appeared to not intersect the 450ft Vertical Miss Distance threshold (VMD*) of the corrective alert zone during one of these negative peaks.This effect becomes less pronounced as CPA gets nears, less time is allowed for the projected Intruder to descend resulting in steady alerting and guidance.The hysteresis provided by ACAS-Xu's probabilistic approach could be a significant advantage in combating surveillance sources with high uncertainty or low resolution such ADS-B or radar.
Regain Well Clear ReversalEncounter DA-62 is an unmitigated encounter with a head-on trajectory and a 0.6 nmi lateral offset (see Figure 3).Ownship flew from west to east and the intruder offset was to the north of the ownship at CPA. Horizontal guidance bands and directive CA guidance from ACAS-Xu for this encounter are shown on the left side of Figure 11.ACAS-Xu suggested a slightly Northerly relative target heading at 87 seconds elapsed, approximately 28 seconds before a LoWC.Interestingly, the directive heading fell within the range of CA bands during this period of time, while there appears to be conflict-free Southerly headings available.The directive heading was therefore inconsistent with the CA bands, an undesirable behavior.This behavior, nonetheless, was not observed in any other encounters analyzed.This heading strengthened from -20 to -42 degrees relative to Ownship heading then reverses direction at 129 seconds elapsed, 7 seconds past DAIDALUS's time of regain DWC, to +48 degrees relative to Ownship heading.In comparison, DAIDALUS (shown on the right side of Figure 11) suggested a Southerly turn throughout the encounter, calculating recovery bands between +6 and +40 degrees to right saturation, i.e.only Southerly turns.
ConclusionsThe analysis presented in this paper compares the DAA alerting and guidance behavior of both ACAS-Xu Run The Hazard Zone in Table 2 is defined in a similar way, using thresholds of the three variables HMD, h, and τ mod .The intruder and UAS are in the Hazard Zone when their HMD, h, and τ mod values all fall below the respective thresholds.The average, early, and late alert times are relative to the time at which the Hazard Zone is violated.DAIDALUS's alert zone is also defined in a similar way to the Well Clear and Hazard Zone, using thresholds of the three variables HMD, h, and τ mod .The HMD threshold is increased to 1.0 nmi to account for sensor and intruder intent uncertainties.The Non-Hazard Zone in Table 2 is also defined in a similar way, except that the UAS in a Non-Hazard zone when any of the three variables is above its threshold.
RWC-06Figure B2 shows maneuver guidance and Regain-WC guidance for scenario RWC-06.RWC-06 is a mitigated scenario with Intruder enclosing on Ownship from 45 • North.Pilot mitigation prevents LoWC so DAIDALUS does not calculate recovery bands during this scenario.
RWC-09Figure B3 shows maneuver guidance and Regain-WC guidance for scenario RWC-09.RWC-09 is a mitigated scenario with Intruder enclosing on Ownship from 90 • North.The differences between ACAS-Xu's CA and DAIDALUS's warning guidance can be seen clearly here.DAIDALUS produces warning guidance near the Ownship heading to left saturation throughout the scenario.In contrast, ACAS-Xu begins its CA guidance further from Ownship heading to left saturation as well.
RWC-12Figure B4 shows maneuver guidance and Regain-WC guidance for scenario RWC-12.RWC-12 is a mitigated scenario with Ownship and Intruder on head-on trajectories.Very similar guidance performance is observed between ACAS-Xu and DAIDALUS.
DA-62Figure B7 shows maneuver guidance and Regain-WC guidance for scenario DA-62.DA-62 is an unmitigated scenario with a head-on trajectory.Because of this, clear comparisons of ACAS-Xu and DAIDALUS alerting timelines can be made.ACAS-Xu's RWC guidance begins slightly before DAIDALUS and progresses to cover the same regions.CA guidance occurs later than DAIDALUS but occur over the same regions as well.
Figure B7. DA-62 DAIDALUS and ACAS-Xu Guidance BandsA discrepancy between the sense of ACAS-Xu's CA headings and DAIDALUS recovery bands is seen midway through the scenario.This scenario occurs with a slight 0.6 nmi Northern horizontal offset.One hypothesized explanation for this behavior is the relatively large timeline that ACAS-Xu directive guidance occurs on would allow for significant time to divert Ownship trajectory in either direction.In this case, either sense being approximately equal in cost and probability.It is less costly to increase the strength of the maneuver than than inverting its sense so strength is increased as the encounter progresses.A limit is reached where such a turn would no longer be viable or is outside of Ownship performance limits so the maneuver's sense is inverted.Further analysis of this scenario is suggested.Figure 1 .1Figure 1.Illustration of Warning guidance information (a) heading (b) altitude (reprinted from MOPS DO-365 of RTCA with permission).
Figure 3 .3Figure3.Scripted Flight Geometries[12]
Figure 4 .4Figure 4. LVC DE and Interpolated Position Error
Figure 66Figure6shows the alerting time before Closest Point of Approach (CPA) and LoWC in both alert levels for both systems during the seven encounters.The actual horizontal CPA was used as the reference point for CPA time.LoWC time is set to the time DAIDALUS's recovery bands start.This time is usually a few seconds before the aircraft enters the alerting zone.Both DAIDALUS and ACAS-Xu provide corrective level alerts before the corrective requirement threshold specified by the DAA MOPS.ACAS-Xu issues RWC alerts 3 seconds earlier than DAIDALUS's corrective alerts on average.This is before the 55 second corrective alert average threshold as expected.DAIDALUS issues warning alerts between 10 and 15 seconds earlier than ACAS-Xu's CA alerts.While ACAS-Xu's CA alerts fall outside of the DAA warning alert threshold, this is expected due to differences between the volumes of NMAC and DWC.
Figure 6 .6Figure 6.Alerting Time Before CPA and WCV
Figure 7 .7Figure 7. RWC-12 Maneuver Guidance
Figure 9 .9Figure 9. DAIDALUS Bands and Alerting With LVC DE Source
Figure 10 .10Figure 10.RWC-12: DAIDALUS and ACAS-Xu Bands
Figure 11 .11Figure 11.ACAS-Xu Guidance Reversal Behavior
FigureFigure B2.RWC-06 DAIDALUS and ACAS-Xu Guidance Bands
Figure B3 .B3Figure B3.RWC-09 DAIDALUS and ACAS-Xu Guidance Bands
FigureFigure B4.RWC-12 DAIDALUS and ACAS-Xu Guidance Bands
Figure B5 .B5Figure B5.RWC-15 DAIDALUS and ACAS-Xu Guidance Bands
Figure B6 .B6Figure B6.RWC-18 DAIDALUS and ACAS-Xu Guidance Bands




Table of ContentsofACAS-Xu Flight Test 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2.2 Flight Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 2.3 DAIDALUS Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 Alerting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6 3.2 Maneuver Guidance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9 3.3 Regain Well-Clear Guidance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11 Alerting Toggle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12 4.2 Regain Well Clear Reversal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .141 Introduction12 Methods32.1 3 Analysis63.1 4 Anomalies124.1
5 Conclusions 14 A Well Clear, Hazard Zone, Alert Zone, and Non-Hazard Zone 18 B Maneuver Guidance Plots 20 Nomenclature[1]7]][4][5]void (DAA) systems are a critical component of Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) to remain Well Clear (WC)[1]from and avoid collisions with other airborne traffic.Manned aircraft rely on the pilot's sight to see and avoid aircraft in nearby airspace.DAA systems use surveillance sensors and algorithms to predict losses of DAA Well Clear (DWC) and provide alerting and guidance to the Pilot in Command (PIC) to ensure separation.Trade studies[2][3][4][5]and prototype DAA algorithms[6,7]have been developed to explore and characterize the technical challenges of DAA.This technical work among others has enabled RTCA Committee 228 (SC-228) to publish Minimum Operational Performance Standards (MOPS DO-365)[1]1 for DAA systems employed by UAS operating in non-terminal areas, referred to as Phase 1 MOPS.This MOPS applies to UAS equipped with Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B), active surveillance, and air-toair radar systems that detect aircraft without transponders.Phase 2 work to extend the MOPS to additional UAS categories and operations is currently underway.1 IntroductionACASAirborne Collision Avoidance SystemADS-BAutomatic Dependent Surveillance -BroadcastDAADetect And AvoidDAIDALUS Detect and AvoID Alerting Logic for Unmanned SystemsD modmodified distanceFAAFederal Aviation AdministrationFT2ACAS-Xu Flight Test 2GPSGlobal Positioning SystemHMD  *Horizontal Miss Distance ThresholdLoWCLoss of Well-ClearMOPSminimum operational performance standardPICpilot in commandRAResolution AdvisoryRWCRemain Well-ClearSTMSurveillance and Tracking ModuleTCASTraffic Alert and Collision Avoidance SystemCPAclosest point of approachTRMThreat Resolution ModuleUASunmanned aircraft systemVMD*vertical miss distance thresholdWCWell-ClearWCVWell-Clear Violationfpm Preventive and corrective alerts and guidance are caution-level (shown to the PIC Feet Per Minutenmi in yellow/amber symbols). They are intended to provide awareness to the PIC that nautical mileτ mod there is a predicted loss of DWC, but that there is sufficient time to coordinate with modified tauAir Traffic Control (ATC). The warning-level (shown to the PIC with a red symbol)alerts and guidance are intended to inform the PIC that an immediate maneuver isrequired. These caution and warning level alerts are in compliance with AdvisoryCircular guidance on the use of alerts. The guidance is of a suggestive nature,indicating a range of vertical and/or horizontal maneuvers predicted to result in aloss of DWC. Maneuvers outside the indicated range are suggested to the PIC toremain DWC. Figure 1 illustrates the heading and altitude guidance display to thePIC. The red color indicates ranges that are predicted to lead to a loss of WellClear. If a loss of DWC is imminent and unavoidable by any maneuver, the DAA isrequired to issue suggestive guidance in order to expedite regaining DWC.DAIDALUS [6] is a DAA algorithm developed by NASA Langley Research Centerto support Phase 1 MOPS development. It serves as a reference of a MOPS-compliant DAA algorithm. DAIDALUS takes a deterministic approach to alertingand guidance calculations [6]. Aircraft states are represented as linear projectionsof deterministic models obtained from surveillance sources such as ADS-B, active[1] alerting and guidance requirements in the DAA MOPS aim at avoiding losses of DWC.The Phase 1 MOPS define the DWC condition by the aircrafts' relative position and velocity.Specifically, it defines the DWC condition by three thresholds: projected horizontal miss distance, current altitude difference, and a nonlinear time to horizontal violation called modified tau.A detailed mathematical definition of DWC can be found in Appendix A. The Phase 1 MOPS defines three DAA alert and guidance levels, Preventive, Corrective, and Warning, in increasing severity[1].
Table 2 .2Parameters for DAA Alerting Requirements (reprinted from MOPS DO-365 of RTCA with permission)
Table 3 .3Equivalent DAA Alert Level
3and DAIDALUS using flight test data from ACAS-Xu FT2 in July, 2017.Alerting comparison results show that ACAS-Xu's RWC alert starts at similar to slightly earlier times to DAIDALUS's corrective alert.ACAS-Xu's CA alert starts at 10-15 seconds later than DAIDALUS's warning alert, and overlaps with DAIDALUS's Regain-WC guidance times nearing LoWC.Guidance comparison results show ACAS-Xu's guidance is found to occur in similar locations and to be more conservative compared to DAIDALUS's, protecting a larger range of headings from maneuvering.In these test conditions, ACAS-Xu's horizontal directive guidance usually started while the RWC bands were saturated and 10-15 seconds before the CA bands begin.DAIDALUS's Regain-WC bands, on the other hand, are not calculated until violation of the warning alert zone is imminent or has occurred.ACAS-Xu's horizontal directive guidance sense agreed with that of DAIDALUS's Regain-WC bands in most analyzed encounters.However, there are notable discrepancies in the DA-62 where ACAS-Xu's directive heading cut well into both ACAS-Xu and DAIDALUS's bands.Further analysis of this scenario is suggested to uncover the cause of this disagreement.ACAS-Xu's alerting and guidance appeared to be more resilient under the tested sensor uncertainties, leaving no gaps in its time series of alert and guidance while DAIDALUS stopped issuing alerts due to noise in the predicted vertical trajectories moving out of the alerting zone.The gaps in DAIDALUS's alerting and guidance may be remedied by filters that reduce the vertical state's uncertainty, either in the surveillance tracker or in the DAA system itself.This comparative analysis reveals striking similarities and differences between the DAA performance of two distinct systems, ACAS-Xu and DAIDALUS.With the Phase 2 MOPS for DAA and MOPS for ACAS-Xu both in progress, the methodology and tools developed for this analysis will be useful for evaluation of upcoming versions of both systems.14.Mu ñoz, C.; and Narkawicz, A.: Formal Analysis of Extended Well-Clear Boundaries for Unmanned Aircraft.Proceedings of the 8th NASA Formal Methods Symposium, Springer, vol.9690, 2016, pp.221-226.
			The complete RTCA DO-365 document referenced may be purchased from RTCA, Inc., 1150 18th Street NW Suite 910, Washington, DC
			20036, (202) 833-9339, www.rtca.org
			WC SC 228 nom b.txt
			http://www.github.com/nasa/wellclear
			MOPS 238
		
		
			
Appendix A Well Clear, Hazard Zone, Alert Zone, and Non-Hazard ZoneThe DAA Well Clear (DWC) zone for the UAS targeted in the Phase 1 MOPS is defined by thresholds of three parameters.It does not have distinct physical boundaries because the definition depends on two aircraft's relative position and velocity during an encounter.Figure A1  The Horizontal Miss Distance (HMD) represents the two aircraft's predicted minimum horizontal distance during an encounter assuming constant velocities.The parameter h represents the two aircraft's current altitude difference.The time metric modified tau, τ mod , is an estimated time taken for the two aircraft to intersect the "protection" disk.The range rate is negative for closing geometries.The positive incremental distance modifier D mod defines the radius of a "protection" disk around the Ownship such that any intruder with a horizontal range less than D mod is always considered "urgent".In this case, τ mod = 0.The thresholds, denoted by an asterisk, for the HMD, h, and τ mod are 4000 ft, 450 ft, and 35 sec, respectively.All three parameters must simultaneously fall below their respective thresholds during an encounter for the two aircraft to violate the DWC.Alerting algorithms are designed to reduce the probability of violating DWC to a value required by the MOPS.The definition of τ mod is [13]where r and ṙ are the horizontal range and range rate between the intruding aircraft and the UAS, respectively.The value of D mod must be equal to HMD * to avoid the undesirable on-and-off alert during an constant velocity encounter [14].
Appendix B Maneuver Guidance Plots
RWC-03Figure B1 shows maneuver guidance and Regain-WC guidance for scenario RWC-03.RWC-03 is a mitigated scenario with a head-on trajectory.The PIC conducted a right turn in accordance with ACAS-Xu suggestive guidance.Pilot mitigation prevents LoWC, meaning no DAIDALUS recovery bands are calculated for this scenario.The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Department of Defense, Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports (0704-0188), 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302.Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB control number.
PLEASE DO NOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS.
Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8/98)Prescribed by ANSI Std.Z39.18
REPORT DATE (DD-MM-YYYY)01-02-2018
REPORT TYPE
Technical Memorandum
DATES COVERED (From -To)
TITLE AND SUBTITLEComparative Analysis of ACAS-Xu and DAIDALUS Detect-and-Avoid Systems
AUTHOR(S)Jason Davies and Minghong G. Wu
PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)NASA Ames Research Center Moffett Field, California 94035-1000
PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT NUMBER
L-
SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)National Aeronautics and Space Administration Washington, DC 20546-0001			
			

				


	
		Minimum Operational Performance Standard (MOPS) for Helicopter Hoist Systems
		10.4271/as6342
		
		
			20036. 2017
			SAE International
			Washington, DC
		
	
	Minimum Operational Performance Standards (MOPS) for Detect-and-Avoid Systems. DO-365, 1150 18th Street NW, Suite 910, Washington, DC 20036, 2017. URL www.rtca.org.



	
		FAA Position on Building Consensus Around the SARP Well-Clear Definition
		
			DWalker
		
	
	
		RTCA Special Committee
		
			228
			2014. Feb. 2014
		
	
	Walker, D.: FAA Position on Building Consensus Around the SARP Well-Clear Definition. RTCA Special Committee, Vol. 228, 2014, Feb. 2014.



	
		Characteristics of a Well Clear Definition and Alerting Criteria for Encounters between UAS and Manned Aircraft in Class E Airspace
		
			MJohnson
		
		
			ERMueller
		
		
			CSantiago
		
	
	
		Proceedings of the Eleventh UAS/Europe Air Trac Management Research and Development Seminar
		the Eleventh UAS/Europe Air Trac Management Research and Development Seminar
		
			2015
		
	
	Johnson, M.; Mueller, E. R.; and Santiago, C.: Characteristics of a Well Clear Definition and Alerting Criteria for Encounters between UAS and Manned Air- craft in Class E Airspace. Proceedings of the Eleventh UAS/Europe Air Trac Management Research and Development Seminar , 2015.



	
		Characterizing the Effects of a Vertical Time Threshold for a Class of Well-Clear Definitions
		
			JasonUpchurch
		
		
			CésarMuñoz
		
		
			AnthonyNarkawicz
		
		
			MaríaConsiglio
		
		
			JamesChamberlain
		
		10.2514/atcq.23.4.275
	
	
		Air Traffic Control Quarterly
		Air Traffic Control Quarterly
		1064-3818
		2472-5757
		
			23
			4
			
			2015
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA)
		
	
	Upchurch, J.; Mu ñoz, C.; Narkawicz, A.; Consiglio, M.; Chamberlain, J.; : Char- acterizing the Effects of a Vertical Time Threshold for a Class of Well-Clear Definitions. Proceedings of the Eleventh USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar (ATM2015), 2015.



	
		Piloted Well Clear Performance Evaluation of Detect-and-Avoid Systems with Suggestive Guidance. Tm, NASA
		
			EMueller
		
		
			CSantiago
		
		
			WSpencer
		
		NASA/TM-2016-219396
		
			Oct. 2016
		
	
	Mueller, E.; Santiago, C.; and Spencer, W.: Piloted Well Clear Perfor- mance Evaluation of Detect-and-Avoid Systems with Suggestive Guidance. Tm, NASA, Oct. 2016. NASA/TM-2016-219396.



	
		DAIDALUS: Detect and Avoid Alerting Logic for Unmanned Systems
		
			CMu Ñoz
		
		
			ANarkawicz
		
		
			GHagen
		
		
			JUpchurch
		
		
			ADutle
		
		
			MConsiglio
		
	
	
		Proceedings of the Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC)
		the Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC)
		
			DASC
			Sept. 2015
		
	
	Mu ñoz, C.; Narkawicz, A.; Hagen, G.; Upchurch, J.; Dutle, A.; Consiglio, M.: DAIDALUS: Detect and Avoid Alerting Logic for Unmanned Systems. Proceed- ings of the Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC), DASC, Sept. 2015.



	
		ACAS Xu UAS Detect and Avoid Solution
		
			WOlson
		
		PMC1400
	
	
		Proceedings of Lincoln Laboratory Air Traffic Control Workshop 2016 -2, no. RTCA Paper
		Lincoln Laboratory Air Traffic Control Workshop 2016 -2, no. RTCA Paper
		
			Dec. 2016
		
	
	Olson, W.: ACAS Xu UAS Detect and Avoid Solution. Proceedings of Lincoln Laboratory Air Traffic Control Workshop 2016 -2, no. RTCA Paper No.261- 15/PMC1400, Dec. 2016.



	
		Nationwide Personal Transportation Survey, 1969: [United States]
		10.3886/icpsr03328
		
			2011
			Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR)
		
	
	United States Department of Transportation, United States Federal Aviation Administration: Introduction to TCAS II Version 7.1. 2011.



	
		Display and Automation Considerations for the Airborne Collision Avoidance System Xu
		
			WAOlson
		
		10.2514/6.2020-2854.vid
		
			June 2015
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA)
		
		
			Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Lincoln Laboratory
		
	
	Tech Notes
	Olson, W. A.: Airborne Collision Avoidance System X. , Massachusetts Insti- tute of Technology, Lincoln Laboratory, June 2015. Tech Notes.



	
		Advanced Collision Avoidance System for UAS (ACAS Xu) Interoperability White Paper Presentation
		
			LFern
		
	
	
		Proceedings of SC-228 WG1
		SC-228 WG1
		
			2017
		
	
	Fern L.: Advanced Collision Avoidance System for UAS (ACAS Xu) Interoper- ability White Paper Presentation. Proceedings of SC-228 WG1, 2017.



	
		Study of Aeronautical Decision Making in Simulated Non-Normal Flight Deck Environment
		
			Nasa
		
		
			Honeywell
		
		
			Acss
		
		
			Faa
		
		10.2514/6.2023-3475.vid
	
	
		General Atomics Aeronautical, Northrop Grumman: FT2 Test Card Deck -Flight 9
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA)
			2017
		
	
	NASA, Honeywell, ACSS, FAA, General Atomics Aeronautical, Northrop Grum- man: FT2 Test Card Deck -Flight 9. 2017.



	
		
			Nasa
		
		
			Honeywell
		
		
			Acss
		
		
			Faa
		
		General Atomics Aeronautical, Northrop Grumman: FT2 Test Card Summary and Schedule
		
			2017
		
	
	NASA, Honeywell, ACSS, FAA, General Atomics Aeronautical, Northrop Grum- man: FT2 Test Card Summary and Schedule. 2017.



	
		Characteristics of a Well Clear Definition and Alerting Criteria for Encounters between UAS and Manned Aircraft in
		
			MJohnson
		
		
			ERMueller
		
		
			CSantiago
		
	
	
		Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar
		
			
			2015
		
	
	Class E Airspace. Eleventh UAS
	Johnson, M.; Mueller, E. R.; and Santiago, C.: Characteristics of a Well Clear Definition and Alerting Criteria for Encounters between UAS and Manned Air- craft in Class E Airspace. Eleventh UAS/Europe Air Traffic Management Re- search and Development Seminar , 2015, pp. 23-26.



	
		STI Product Title
		
			FirstNameLast Name
		
		10.2172/1429240
		
			
			Office of Scientific and Technical Information (OSTI)
		
	
	nasa.gov
	NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON STI Information Desk (help@sti.nasa.gov)



	
		
		
			Telephone Number
		
		
	
	Include area code
	TELEPHONE NUMBER (Include area code)


				
			
		
	
