
	
	
		
I. IntroductionThe National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) is developing the Shadow Mode Assessment Using Realistic Technologies for the National Airspace System (SMART-NAS) Test Bed.SMART-NAS Test Bed is an air traffic simulation platform whose overarching purpose is to conduct high-fidelity, realtime, human-in-the-loop and automation-in-the-loop simulations of current and proposed future air traffic concepts for the United States' Next Generation Air Transportation System called NextGen [1].SMART-NAS Testbed (referred to as SNTB) will enable simulations that are currently impractical or impossible for three major focus areas of NextGen research and development:• Concepts across multiple operational domains such as gate-to-gate trajectory-based operations (TBO) concepts [2] • Concepts related to the seamless and widespread integration of new entrants into the National Airspace System (NAS) such as large and small unmanned aerial systems (UAS) [3], on-demand urban air mobility vehicles [4], supersonic aircraft [5], and commercial space operations [6] • Real-time system-wide safety assurance technologies to allow safe, increasingly autonomous operations in conjunction with traditional manned operations [7] The vision for SNTB has evolved over time [8] and shaped by the limitations (and strengths) of current research and operational simulation platforms.These limitations can be characterized in three dimensions -scope (how extensive is the simulation), cost (how resource intensive is the simulation), and value (how much is gained from the simulation).Scope: In general, the simulation tools and systems are developed separately for the different air traffic domains (e.g., surface, terminal, en route, oceanic, etc.).They are usually tailored to the evaluation of specific operational concepts and not easily integrated.Future air traffic concepts are often evaluated using a limited number of air traffic operations due to the complexity of managing large-scale simulations.Research simulators [9][10] [11][12][13] usually model real-world complexities with less fidelity and with fewer interfaces to information than will be encountered in live field demonstrations and operational Value: Simulation tools and infrastructure are not standardized across work-groups and stakeholders.Sharing of simulation capabilities and data is difficult even within the same organization.The configuration management, access and archival of simulation results is often insufficient to reuse during later research activities.As a result, many simulation capabilities are repeatedly redeveloped.Finally, the analysis tools are developed independent from the simulation tools, so today's high-fidelity simulations often generate more data than can be thoroughly analyzed.This paper describes the vision for the SMART-NAS Test Bed.It begins with a general overview and illustrates the concept of operations.The approach used for development and a more detailed description of the features is then provided.Lastly, the paper briefly describes how SMART-NAS Test Bed has initially been used by other research projects.
II. System OverviewThis section describes the set of high-level requirements that were formulated to address the modeling and simulation shortfalls discussed above.It also describes how those high-level requirements are to be used by describing the SNTB conceptual framework and its concept of use.
A. High Level RequirementsThe primary SNTB objective is to accelerate transformation of the National Airspace System (NAS) through higher fidelity simulation, testing, and technology transfer of more mature technologies to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and aviation stakeholders.The eight primary SNTB requirements are:1. SNTB shall simulate both current and alternative air traffic operations, architectures, technologies, roles and responsibilities, and business strategies.2. SNTB shall integrate operational and prototype systems using standardized interfaces defined by stakeholders.3. SNTB shall include any combination of live (i.e., real people operating real systems), virtual (i.e., real people operating simulated systems), and constructive (i.e., simulated people operating simulated systems) air traffic operations.4. SNTB shall execute concurrent air traffic simulations by multiple, independent users.5. SNTB shall execute geographically distributed air traffic simulations.6. SNTB shall provide a set of core services for simulation design (both architecture and scenario), execution, and configuration management.7. SNTB shall allow users to augment the existing set of SNTB capabilities with their own capabilities.8. SNTB shall allow users to share their individual simulation components and simulation results with other users.
B. Concept FrameworkThe SNTB platform is comprised of six primary elements shown in Figure 1.A set of secure support services (shown in the top-left portion of the diagram) are provided to simplify all aspects of real-time, human-in-the-loop and automation-in-the-loop simulations from design (i.e., prior to execution) through analysis (i.e., after execution).These services are primarily web-based.They include authentication, authorization and accounting; scenario generation; simulation architecture and asset configuration; command, control and monitoring; real-time visualization; and data analysis support.
Figure 1 SNTB Platform Elements and CapabilitiesThere are three foundational infrastructure elements shown in the upper middle portion of Figure 1, that underlie SNTB.The GovCloud [19] (cloud service) allows SNTB to execute multiple simultaneous largescale air traffic management (ATM) and air traffic control (ATC) simulations by utilizing its on-demand compute resources.NASA's ATM Data Warehouse [20] provides access to an extensive archive of historical air traffic, weather and airspace data, as well as the ability to use Big Data analytics (process of collecting, organizing, and examining large data sets).Finally, Data Distribution Service (DDS) [21]], a middleware standard, enables scalable, real-time, dependable, high-performance, and interoperable data exchanges between both legacy and emerging technologies.SNTB will connect geographically distributed air traffic simulation and flight simulator facilities inside and outside of NASA (shown in the top-right portion of Figure 1).The resulting combination of real and virtual facilities have an unparalleled simulation capacity spanning all phases of an aircraft's operation from start (e.g., gate pushback) to finish (e.g., gate arrival).These facilities have the ability to simulate key actors in the National Airspace System (NAS) including the air navigation service providers (ANSP), the airline operations centers (AOC), and the flight deck.Live, virtual, and constructive (LVC) flight operations [22] (shown in the bottom-left portion of Figure 1) are used to support a broad array of tests from traditional human-in-the-loop research simulations to shadow tests and flight demonstrations.Live and recorded air traffic data from the FAA are combined with data from non-FAA sources (e.g.NOAA, airlines) to form the SNTB data store.Actual flight operations can be combined with simulated air traffic generated by NASA and industry flight simulators and traffic generators.Sophisticated ATM and ATC systems (shown in the bottom-middle portion of Figure 1) will be incorporated as pluggable extensions to SNTB.They will be used to construct realistic, high-fidelity emulations of both current and proposed air traffic operational concepts.Examples of these systems include operational automation platforms (e.g., FAA systems), research prototypes of future advanced capabilities (e.g., NASA prototypes), and commercial air traffic solutions (e.g., industry applications).Lastly, the capability to perform human-in-the-loop real-time NAS wide simulations (bottom-right portion of Figure 1) is used to research alternative concepts and compare with current operations.SNTB will help facilitate the setup and execution of these simulations.In addition to the elements described in the diagram, SNTB allows the augmentation and extension of its capabilities with both NASA and non-NASA components.It promotes the sharing of both simulation capabilities and simulation data among its users.Three distinct libraries are provided by SNTB: a component library of the pluggable extensions to SNTB, a scenario library of traffic, weather and airspace scenarios previously simulated, and a simulation library of the results of previous SNTB simulations.
C. Simplified Concept of UseThe simplified SNTB Concept of Use is illustrated in the Figure 2. The user's interactions with SNTB are organized into five color-coded categories numbered one through five.Step 1 (brown): The user logs into the SNTB web portal from an ordinary web browser.The user may initiate their session from both NASA and non-NASA domains (i.e., internal and external networks).The user's credentials are verified by the Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting service.The user may provide NASA or third-party credentials (i.e., third-party identification).Step 2 (blue): A secure user session is established to guarantee the confidentiality of the user's activity and data.SNTB allows concurrent sessions by different users as well as the same individual user.All web traffic associated with the user's session includes the user's credentials.The Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting service ensures that web content and data is only provided to authenticated and authorized users.Step 3 (green): The user's web browser receives SNTB content from the User Account, Component Library, Scenario Library, and Simulation Library services.The User Account maintains the user's personal settings; the Component Library contains the set of supported simulation components; the Scenario Library contains scenario playbooks available for execution; and the Simulation Library contains the results of previously executed simulations.The Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting service ensures that SNTB content and data is appropriate for the user's identity, role and authorization level.Step 4 (orange): The user interacts with several core services to manage the creation and execution of SNTB simulations.First, the Simulation Architect is used to define the components of the simulation and their configuration.Second, the Scenario Generator is used to define the traffic, weather, and airspace configurations for the simulation, if a predefined scenario from the library is not used.Lastly, the Command, Control and Monitoring services are used to start, stop, and monitor the simulation.Each of these services provides additional SNTB content to the user's web browser.Step 5 (purple): Using the Command, Control and Monitoring services, simulations defined by Simulation Architect and Scenario Generator are executed by SNTB.Simulation components may be run on physical and virtual, NASA and non-NASA compute resources.All of the elements of a simulation are integrated using the DDS communication middleware.Simulations are comprised of several primary types of components.Simulated (i.e., virtual and constructive) air traffic is provided by traffic generators and flight simulators (initially, NASA systems, but eventually external systems will be available).Live air traffic is provided by the FAA System Wide Information Management (SWIM) [23] digital data-sharing network.If needed the ATM Data Warehouse provides recorded air traffic, weather, and airspace configuration information.Specific current and proposed operational concepts can be tested in SNTB by using their associated NextGen applications (both prototype and operational) in conjunction with the live, virtual and constructive traffic, weather and airspace configuration information.Finally, a wide range of support tools allow the simulation to be observed, recorded, replayed, and analyzed by the user.
Figure 2 Simplified SNTB Concept of Use
III. Development ApproachThe SNTB development is described in terms of a set of nominal use cases each of which comprised of a set of major capabilities.These nominal use cases are realized through the implementation of four major SNTB software builds.Each software build, has a set of system-level functional requirements that are used to guide the software development.
A. Nominal Use CasesThe nine nominal use cases are listed in Table 3.The SNTB nominal use cases are representative of potential SNTB configurations and inform SNTB system-level and functional requirements.These nominal use cases were chosen to encompass the initial major representative capabilities that together span the entire set of SNTB capabilities.Additional nominal use cases may be added in the future to support a broader range of capabilities.Various combinations of these capabilities will be used to compose individual customer use cases.They will have varying degrees of maturity with the objective to provide initial benefit to users and demonstrate capability.
B. Software BuildsDuring its planned five-year development period that started in 2016, SNTB will mature through a series of software builds as shown in the Appendix.New core services and components will be added with each build to support the increasing set of nominal use cases.One of the benefits of the incremental approach is it allows leveraging lessons learned during development to make more informed decisions and mitigate risk.Additionally, it allows for requirement changes during development.
Table 3 Nominal Use Cases
C. System-Level Functional RequirementsEach SNTB build will contain an incremental set of capabilities that are reflected in a set of system-level functional requirements.All of these SNTB requirements are contained in the SNTB Specifications Tree (SST).The current hierarchy of the SNTB specifications is shown in Figure 3.The SST will grow as new SNTB capabilities are added.The SST traces from the project goals and nominal use cases to system requirements to major subsystem requirements and lower level software requirements.The system-level functional requirements shared among the subsequent builds are repeatedly verified during SNTB system integration prior to use by customers.
IV. System DescriptionFour teams consisting of 13 organizations were contracted with the task of developing architecture alternatives for the test bed [8].Recommendations from this study influenced the design of the system architecture.The envisioned SNTB high-level system architecture is shown in Figure 4.The architecture diagram is used to communicate the scope of the system, develop requirements, and identify interfaces.SNTB has a flexible, scalable and extensible publish-and-subscribe design.The specific components included in the architecture diagram are examples of the most relevant and highest-priority customer needs for early SNTB users.As SNTB development progresses, additional components and additional types of components will be added to support the increasing portfolio of use cases.Overall, SNTB will integrate an extensive set of real-  The SMART-NAS Test Bed uses a publish and subscribe communications architecture.The Publishers and Subscribers are associated by common message topics but are unaware of each other or the network topology.This scalable architecture allows for components in the system to communicate with one another in a loosely coupled fashion and promotes a desired "plug-and-play" feature for components integrating into SNTB.The architecture is decentralized and does not have single points of failure or performance bottlenecks that are seen in architectures using centralized message brokers.ii. Cloud-Based SNTB will be able to leverage cloud resources and allow a lab to scale beyond its resident computing capabilities.Cloud compute resources can be used as needed and released when they are not to enable simulations that are currently impractical or impossible.Additional compute resources may also be used when processing data pre and post-simulation.iii.Distributed Execution Different labs and simulation facilities have unique characteristics that focus on providing realism toward simulating specific operational domains of the NAS such as airport control towers, aircraft flight decks, and airline operation centers.Live, virtual, and constructive flight operations are also used to perform simulations.Currently, these facilities each conduct simulations independently from one another.To help enable the research of concepts across multiple operational domains, SNTB was designed with an architectural feature of the capability to connect these facilities and have them interact within the same simulation.This enables leveraging each facility's unique simulation fidelity characteristics, leverage shared resources, and support the ability to conduct simulations that examine complex interactions involving multiple ATM operational domains.
B. High-Level Designi. Data Distribution Service Data Distribution Service (DDS) is the communications middleware used in SNTB that follows the publishand-subscribe architecture.The use of DDS is a recommendation from the studies that examined alternative Test Bed architectures mentioned in Section IV.Using a middleware communications layer allows applications developer to focus on the business logic of the application with less concern about the low-level communications implementation.DDS provides an application programming interface (API) to Quality of Service settings that have a number of options to specify communication behavior and performance.DDS is an open standard from the Object Management Group (OMG).Since DDS is a standard and has interoperability between vendor implementations, the use of DDS does not restrict SNTB to a particular DDS vendor.DDS can be run on major operating systems (Linux, Windows, Mac OSX) and with a number of programming language implementations (Java, C/C++, Scala, Ruby, and others) heterogeneously.ii. Authentication, Authorization and AccountingThe Simplified Concept of Use section II.C. describes how each user is required to log in to the SNTB System.The user's credentials will be authenticated and then allow access to SNTB content that is appropriate for the user's identity, role and authorization level and conversely restrict access to content for which the user is not authorized for.SNTB will be able to accommodate various usage and confidentiality use cases (e.g.sharing or restricting access or visibility of proprietary components).Another benefit of requiring a user to log in is the ability to track usage and storage for accounting purposes.iii.Web Services Users access all SMART-NAS Test Bed functionality through a web browser.By using a web interface, SNTB can be accessed by any machine independent of platform as long as it is connected to the network and supports a web browser.Web enabled accessibility will allow the use of SNTB Core Services (described in sub section v.) to be performed remotely outside the confines of the lab.For tasks that may require a long processing time, a user can start the process, log off, and return later to SNTB when the process is completed.
iv. Component AdaptersComponents integrated into the SNTB framework are treated as "black boxes" (i.e., no knowledge of the component's internal workings).Component Adapters function as bridges between the Component and the SNTB system, by translating component input and output messages and mapping data to communicate with the SNTB DDS architecture.Currently, the SNTB Development team is creating the Component Adapters to provide some initial capability to SNTB.The SNTB Development team will use the lessons learned from this task to develop templates and instructions that will enable developer partners to create adapters for their own components to contribute into SNTB.v. Core Services (Scenario Generation; Architecture Generation; Command, Control and Monitoring) SMART-NAS Test Bed provides a number of Core Services that support the lifecycle of a simulation.These services are intended to be used "a la carte" (to permit users to use their own tools where appropriate) or with the other SNTB services, because the SNTB framework cannot anticipate all the specific needs of the users.Furthermore, SNTB will provide integration points to allow users to add custom code and later contribute to enhance the Test Bed.The following is a description of three primary Core Services.The first SNTB Core Service is Scenario Generation.Generating a scenario that will run in a simulation is largely done manually today.The task can be tedious, time consuming, and error prone.SNTB currently provides an early version of the Scenario Generation service to assist in automating this task that contains filtering and pre-processing routines for the input traffic data and can accommodate user defined routines.A drag-and-drop graphic user interface (GUI) is used to assemble the data sources (traffic, weather, airspace definitions), specify filtering and preprocessing, and assign the simulation software tool(s) that will use the output files of this service as scenario input (Figure 5).This approach provides ease of use and allows a user without a coding background to perform this task.A record of the data source and processing used to produce the scenario is also generated for use in an audit trail of the simulation.A future version will integrate with NASA's ATM Data Warehouse for access to the latter's archive of historical air traffic, weather and airspace data, as well as Big Data analytics.
Figure 5 Scenario Architect GUIArchitecture Generation is the second SNTB Core Service.It uses a drag-and-drop GUI similar to the one used for Scenario Generation, to define a simulation's components, their runtime configuration, and their interconnectivity.Only Components that are authorized for the user will be available for the user to include in their Architecture.A benefit of this approach is that the layout can be visualized and the configuration details are recorded into an Architecture file.Command, Control, and Monitoring is the third Core service that provides the user the ability to control and execute simulations.The status and health of infrastructure elements, simulations, and Simulation Components will be displayed on the Simulation Command and Control View.To run a simulation, a user will specify the scenario from the Scenario Generation service or uploaded by the user and the Architecture generated from the Architecture Generation service.The typical usage envisioned is for a given architecture to be paired with different scenarios that follow a researcher's simulation test matrix.As this service evolves, users will have runtime controls that allow simulations to be paused, resumed and operated at non-real-time rates if supported by the Simulation Component.Additional health status information will be provided to monitor the performance of individual infrastructure elements and Simulation Components.vi. Core LibrariesThe many services, SNTB also contains a set of Core libraries.The Component Library contains the available simulation components; the Scenario Library contains scenario playbooks available for execution; and the Simulation Library contains the results of previously executed simulations.These libraries are move than just storage locations because they are combined with SNTB features and services for access control and file sharing, remote access via the web, simulation and architecture configuration files, scenarios files, pluggable components to provide a place for SNTB users to contribute, share, reuse, and collaborate with one another.All the elements to rerun a previous simulation are stored in the SNTB libraries.A simulation run on SNTB by one user can be re-run by a different user with caveats regarding access privileges and hardware accessibility.This enables reproducible research for simulations where research results can be verified and/or be extended.It also reduces a single point of failure risk related to a single expert with knowledge of how to operate the entire simulation.Another benefit made possible by these features is the ease of advancing a concept's Technical Readiness Level (TRL) by initially using the low fidelity components (available in the library) and later using more realistic ones.
C. Measures of
Capability MetricsQuantify the breadth of capabilities in regard to the scope of air traffic simulations that can be conducted.
• Number of Simulation Components [KPP]• Maximum Sustained Duration of High-Fidelity Simulation
Utility MetricsQuantify the utility in regard to supporting the high-fidelity simulation and testing activities of other users.
• Number of Activities Using SNTB [KPP]• Total User Account Activity
Usability MetricQuantify the usability in regard to providing a user-acceptable simulation and testing environment.• Mean User Experience Rating
Performance MetricsQuantify the performance in regard to the number, size, and speed of simulations that can be conducted
V. SNTB UtilizationAlthough SNTB is still in an early state, some capabilities are already in a sufficiently mature state to provide benefits to other projects.The Airspace Technology Demonstration 3 (ATD-3): Dynamic Routes for Arrivals in Weather (DRAW) project [24] has used the SNTB Scenario Generation service for their Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) simulation #1 (May 16-25 2017) and in a portion of HITL #2 (Oct 4-13 2017).The SNTB Scenario Generation service was used to automatically generate scenarios with air traffic for the entire DFW Center.This scenario consists of approximately 400-500 flights and weather conditions from an actual day.Generating a scenario of this scale would have been extremely difficult or near impossible if done manually.Using actual historical data provides a basis of realism for the scenario and allows a baseline to compare against.The Real-Time Safety Monitoring (RTSM) framework was developed for monitoring and predicting the state of safety as well as predict unsafe events in the NAS.This project completed a study where live FAA SWIM traffic data was provided by SNTB to the RTSM framework [25].By demonstrating the framework's use of real flight data from an operational source, the RTSM project anticipates that the acceptance for deployment will be accelerated.
VI. ConclusionThis paper described the current state and vision for the SMART-NAS Test Bed, an air traffic simulation platform that will enable real-time simulations that are currently impractical or impossible.SNTB has the ability to scale, connect, share, leverage other simulation assets, and reduce the complexity involved in setting up and running simulations.The combination of these features can permit additional benefits including, reproducible research, distributing the expertise related to the setup and execution of a simulation, and increasing the TRL development pace.This ambitious vision has crystalized over time and holds much promise, but much work remains.SNTB will continue to develop incrementally, adding new capabilities and maturing the existing ones.Figure 3 Figure 434Figure 3 SNTB Specifications Tree
Futurework involving using SNTB to assist other NASA projects has been planned.Some examples are: Airspace Technology Demonstration 2 (ATD-2), Low Boom Flight Demonstrator (LBFD), and New York Trajectory Based Operations (NYTBO).Furthermore, the Integrated Demand Management (IDM) project intends to integrate a simulation capability into SNTB that automates both the human components and collaboration between operational systems[26].



[18]example, traffic simulation is typically limited to specific operations (e.g., arrival operations, air carrier operations, etc.) and weather simulation is generally limited to gross atmospheric conditions (e.g., winds and temperature) as a static condition over the course of each simulation run.Most operational data (e.g., nationwide flight plan and surveillance data) has only been available to a select community until fairly recently.Few simulation capabilities have had the ability to incorporate airline information sources.Training simulator implementations[14][15][16][17][18]typically use operational systems to certify air traffic controllers and traffic managers.Many elements of the training simulators are high-fidelity representations of the current air traffic system.Usually, operational systems are dedicated for a single purpose, do not have extensibility features, and lack the ability to model future air traffic concepts.Cost: Real-time, high-fidelity simulations are executed in individual brick-and-mortar laboratories by a limited number of research organizations.Smaller organizations do not have the resources to build or maintain sizeable facilities, and thus limited to smaller simulations.Operational systems are proprietary commercial products and restricted government equipment and only available to prominent research institutions with substantial resources.Human-in-the-loop simulation testing is time-consuming, resource intensive, and error-prone.A large amount of undocumented corporate knowledge and manual activities are necessary to achieve successful and useful results.I Former Project Technical Lead, Aviation Systems Division II Deputy Technical Lead, Aerospace Simulation Research and Development Branch III Software Development Lead, Systems Modeling and Optimization Branch implementation.
Table 4 Progress Indicators4Performance and Progress Indicators SNTB will use Measures of Performances (MOP) and Key Performance Parameters (KPP) to monitor and evaluate the development of its technologies.MOPs quantitatively characterize the extent of SNTB development maturity.KPPs are a subset of the MOPs that are of particular interest to the SNTB users and are used in communication with them.The SNTB MOPs and KPPs are listed inTable 4 below:
• Number of Concurrent Simulations • Number of High-Fidelity Simulated Aircraft [KPP] • Maximum Simulation Time Rate
		
		

			
This paper describes the Shadow-Mode Assessment Using Realistic Technologies for the National Airspace System (SMART-NAS) Test Bed.The SMART-NAS Test Bed is an air traffic simulation platform being developed by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).The SMART-NAS Test Bed's core purpose is to conduct high-fidelity, real-time, human-in-the-loop and automation-in-the-loop simulations of current and proposed future air traffic concepts for the United States' Next Generation Air Transportation System called NextGen.
			

			
VII. Appendix			
			

				


	
		The Next-Generation Air Transportation System's Joint Planning Environment: A Decision Support System
		
			EdgarWaggoner
		
		
			ScottGoldsmith
		
		
			JoshElliot
		
		10.2514/6.2009-7011
	
	
		9th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference (ATIO)
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			Version 3.2. 2011
		
		
			U.S. Department of Transportation -Joint Planning and Development Office
		
	
	U.S. Department of Transportation -Joint Planning and Development Office. Concept of Operations for the Next Generation Air Transportation System, Version 3.2. 2011.



	
		The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
		
			VincentPGalotti
		
		10.4324/9781315239514-3
	
	
		The Future Air Navigation System (FANS)
		
			Routledge
			2016
			
		
	
	Version 7.0.0.
	International Civil Aviation Organization -Air Traffic Management Requirements and Performance Panel. Working Paper 652, Appendix A: TBO Concept, Version 7.0.0. 2016.



	
		Joint Planning and Development Office (JPDO) Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS)
		
			YogiShah
		
		10.1109/icnsurv.2013.6548689
	
	
		2013 Integrated Communications, Navigation and Surveillance Conference (ICNS)
		
			IEEE
			September 2013
		
		
			U.S. Department of Transportation -Joint Planning and Development Office
		
	
	U.S. Department of Transportation -Joint Planning and Development Office. Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) Comprehensive Plan: A Report on the Nation's UAS Path Forward. September 2013.



	
		Fast-Forwarding to a Future of On-Demand Urban Air Transportation
		
			Uber Elevate
		
		10.3030/774086
		
			27 October 2016
			Publications Office of the European Union
		
	
	UBER Elevate, Fast-Forwarding to a Future of On-Demand Urban Air Transportation. 27 October 2016.



	
		A Preliminary Evaluation of Supersonic Transport Category Vehicle Operations in the National Airspace System
		
			MatthewCUnderwood
		
		
			MichaelDGuminsky
		
		10.2514/6.2015-3401
	
	
		15th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference
		Dallas, Texas
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			June 2015
			
		
	
	Underwood, M. C., and Guminsky, M. D. A Preliminary Evaluation of Supersonic Transport Category Vehicle Operations in the National Airspace System. AIAA AVIATION Forum. Dallas, Texas. 22-26 June 2015.



	
		Capstone Concept for Joint Operations, Version 3.0
		
			Department Of Defense Washington Dc
		
		10.21236/ada493960
		
			
			Defense Technical Information Center
		
		
			U.S. Department of Transportation -Joint Planning and Development Office
		
	
	Version 1.0. undated
	U.S. Department of Transportation -Joint Planning and Development Office. Space Transportation Concept of Operations Annex for NextGen. Version 1.0. undated.



	
		Real Time Safety Monitoring: Concept for Supporting Safe Flight Operations
		
			LillySpirkovska
		
		
			IndranilRoychoudhury
		
		
			MatthewDaigle
		
		
			KaiGoebel
		
		10.2514/6.2017-4494
	
	
		17th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference
		Denver, Colorado
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			June 2017
			
		
	
	Spirkovska, L., Roychoudhury, I., Daigle, M., and Goebel, K. Real-Time Safety Monitoring: Concept for Supporting Safe Flight Operations. AIAA AVIATION Forum. Denver, Colorado. 5-9 June 2017.



	
		Shadow Mode Assessment using Realistic Technologies for the National Airspace System (SMART NAS)<br /> Test Bed Development (Invited)
		
			KeePalopo
			
				AIAAAviation Forum
			
		
		
			GanoBrotoChatterji
			
				AIAAAviation Forum
			
		
		
			MichaelDGuminsky
			
				AIAAAviation Forum
			
		
		
			PatriciaCGlaab
			
				AIAAAviation Forum
			
		
		10.2514/6.2015-2794
	
	
		AIAA Modeling and Simulation Technologies Conference
		Dallas, TX
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			2015. June 2015
			
		
		
			SMART NAS) Test Bed Development
		
	
	Palopo, K., Chatterji, G., Guminsky, M., and Glaab, P., Shadow Mode Assessment using Realistic Technologies for the National Airspace System (SMART NAS) Test Bed Development, 2015 AIAAAviation Forum, Dallas, TX, 22-26 June 2015.



	
		A Perspective on NASA Ames Air Traffic Management Research
		
			JefferySchroeder
		
		10.2514/6.2009-7054
		
	
	
		9th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference (ATIO)
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			2017. September 13
		
	
	NASA Ames Aviation Systems Division (2017, September 13). Airspace Traffic Generator (ATG) [online] Available at: https://www.aviationsystemsdivision.arc.nasa.gov/facilities/ffc/atg.shtml



	
		Multi-Fidelity Predictions for Control Allocation on the NASA Ikhana Research Aircraft to Minimiz...
		
			Nasa Hsi Division
		
		10.2514/6.2023-0622.vid
		
	
	
		The Multi Aircraft Control System (MACS
		
			2016. December 22
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA)
		
	
	NASA HSI Division (2016, December 22) The Multi Aircraft Control System (MACS) [online] Available at: https://hsi.arc.nasa.gov/groups/aol/technologies/macs.php



	
		European Organization for the Safety of Air Navigation (EUROCONTROL)
		
			AndriesStéphanie
		
		10.1093/law:epil/9780199231690/e637
		
	
	
		Eurocontrol.int
		
			2017
			Oxford University Press
		
	
	Eurocontrol.int. (2017). The EUROCONTROL Simulation Capabilities and Platform for Experimentation (ESCAPE) Factsheet | Eurocontrol. [online] Available at: http://www.eurocontrol.int/publications/eurocontrol- simulation-capabilities-and-platform-experimentation-escape-factsheet



	
		Welcome to NARSIM.org
		
			Narsim
		
		
			Org
		
		
		
			2017
		
	
	Narsim.org. (2017). Welcome to NARSIM.org. [online] Available at: https://www.narsim.org/joomla/



	
		BlueSky Website
		
			Tu Delft
		
		
		
			2017
		
	
	TU Delft. (2017). BlueSky Website. [online] Available at: http://homepage.tudelft.nl/7p97s/BlueSky/



	
		Simulation and Integration of Ground, Network, and Air Links (SIGNAL)
		
			Faa
		
		
		
			2017
		
	
	FAA (2017). Simulation and Integration of Ground, Network, and Air Links (SIGNAL). [online] Available at: https://www.faa.gov/about/office_org/headquarters_offices/arc/programs/academy/signal/ 15



	
		Falla, Norris Stephen, (3 May 1883–6 Nov. 1945), Chairman and Managing Director Union Steam Ship Co. of NZ Ltd; Chairman Union Airways of NZ Ltd; Chairman Tasman Empire Airways; Director Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Co.; British India Steam Navigation Co.
		
			Airways
		
		10.1093/ww/9780199540884.013.u225257
		
	
	
		Total Control Simulator | Airways
		
			Oxford University Press
			2017
		
	
	Airways. (2017). Total Control Simulator | Airways. [online] Available at: https://www.airways.co.nz/products-and-services/training-solutions/total-control-simulation/



	
		Simulation and Input -NATS
		
			Nats
		
		
		
			2017
		
	
	NATS. (2017). Simulation and Input -NATS. [online] Available at: http://www.nats.aero/services/consultancy/training/simulation-input/



	
		
			Adacel
		
		
		MaxSim, Air Traffic Control Simulator
		
			2017
		
	
	Adacel. (2017). MaxSim, Air Traffic Control Simulator [online] Available at: http://www.adacel.com/MaxSimATC.html



	
		Database Services in AWS
		
			JasonNadon
		
		10.1007/978-1-4842-2589-9_10
		
	
	
		Website Hosting and Migration with Amazon Web Services
		
			Apress
			2017
			
		
	
	Amazon Web Services, Inc. (2017). GovCloud-Amazon Web Services (AWS). [online] Available at: https://aws.amazon.com/govcloud-us/.



	
		Architecture and capabilities of a data warehouse for ATM research
		
			MichelleEshow
		
		
			MaxLui
		
		
			ShubhaRanjan
		
		10.1109/dasc.2014.6979560
	
	
		2014 IEEE/AIAA 33rd Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC)
		Colorado Springs, Colorado
		
			IEEE
			2014 October 5-9
		
	
	Eshow, M. M., Lui, M., and Ranjan, S. Architecture and Capabilities of a Data Warehouse for ATM Research. IEEE/AIAA 33 rd Digital Avionics Systems Conference. Colorado Springs, Colorado. 2014 October 5-9.



	
		Statistical Modeling of LargeScale Scientific Simulation Data
		
			AFoster
		
		10.1109/9780471696650.ch11
		
	
	
		Next Generation of Data-Mining Applications
		
			IEEE
			2014 November
		
	
	Foster, A. (2014 November) Using DDS for Scalable, High Performance, Real-time Data Sharing in Next Generation Modeling & Simulation Systems, Version 1. [online] Available at: http://www.prismtech.com/sites/default/files/documents/Modeling-Simulation-Whitepaper-290515.pdf



	
		Message Latency Characterization of a Distributed Live, Virtual, Constructive Simulation Environment
		
			JamesRMurphy
		
		
			SrbaJovic
		
		
			NeilOtto
		
		10.2514/6.2015-1647
	
	
		AIAA Infotech @ Aerospace
		London
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			14-15 November, 2017
		
	
	Murphy, J., Otto, N., Evolution of a Distributed Live, Virtual, Constructive Environment for Human in the Loop Unmanned Aircraft Testing, RAeS and AIAA Modelling and Simulation in Air Traffic Management Conference, London, 14-15 November, 2017.



	
		Quality of Service Requirements for System Wide Information Management (SWIM)
		
			TSmith
		
		10.1109/dasc.2005.1563291
		
	
	
		24th Digital Avionics Systems Conference
		
			IEEE
			2017
		
	
	Federal Aviation Administration
	Federal Aviation Administration (2017). System Wide Information Management (SWIM) [online] Available at: https://www.faa.gov/nextgen/programs/swim/



	
		Dynamic Arrival Routes: A Trajectory-Based Weather Avoidance System for Merging Arrivals and Metering
		
			ChesterGong
		
		
			DaveMcnally
		
		10.2514/6.2015-3394
	
	
		15th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference
		Dallas, TX
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			2015. June 2015
			
		
	
	Gong, C., McNally, D., and Lee, C.H., Dynamic Arrival Routes: A Trajectory-Based Weather Avoidance System for Merging Arrivals and Metering, 2015 AIAA Aviation Forum, Dallas, TX, 22-26 June 2015.



	
		Initial Demonstration of the Real-Time Safety Monitoring Framework for the National Airspace System Using Flight Data
		
			IndranilRoychoudhury
		
		
			MattDaigle
		
		
			KaiGoebel
		
		
			LiljanaSpirkovska
		
		
			ShankarSankararaman
		
		
			JohnOssenfort
		
		
			ChetanKulkarni
		
		
			WilliamMcdermott
		
		
			ScottPoll
		
		10.2514/6.2016-4216
	
	
		16th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference
		Washington, DC
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			2016. Jun. 2016
			
		
	
	United States 26
	Roychoudhury, I., Daigle, M., Goebel, K., Spirkovska, L., Sankararaman, S., Ossenfort, J., Kulkarni, C., McDermott, W., and Poll, S., Initial Demonstration of the Real-Time Safety Monitoring Framework for the National Airspace System Using Flight Data, AIAA Aviation 2016; 13-17 Jun. 2016; Washington, DC; United States 26



	
		Using an Automated Air Traffic Simulation Capability for a Parametric Study in Traffic Flow Management
		
			HeatherArneson
		
		
			AntonyDEvans
		
		
			DeepakKulkarni
		
		
			PaulULee
		
		
			JinhuaLi
		
		
			MeiYWei
		
		10.2514/6.2018-3665
	
	
		2018 Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference
		London
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			14-15 November, 2017
		
	
	Arneson, H., Evans, A., Li, J. and Wei, M., Automated Simulation in Support of Integrated Demand Management, RAeS and AIAA Modelling and Simulation in Air Traffic Management Conference, London, 14-15 November, 2017.


				
			
		
	
