
	
	
		
IntroductionAirspace is divided into sectors to distribute air traffic controller workload.The goal is to balance the workload amongst all controllers, while not overwhelming any single controller.Overloading an air traffic controller is unsafe, and aircraft rerouting and delays are used to prevent overloading.Optimally partitioning the airspace, hereafter known as sectorization, requires a metric that quantifies controller workload.Previous research identified such a quantification, known as Dynamic Density, that includes a wide variety of air traffic and airspace metrics [1][2][3][4][5][6].This has been narrowed to a subset of key metrics known as the Simplified Dynamic Density [7,8].Geosect is a tool that partitions the airspace into sectors, while optimizing a cost function representing the magnitude of controller workload for each sector [9][10][11][12].Geosect accomplishes this using computational geometric techniques and constraints to produce sector shapes that are acceptable to air traffic controllers.In its current implementation, Geosect uses a cost function that is a combination of the number of aircraft predicted to be in a given sector (aircraft count) and the average amount of time each aircraft is predicted to spend in each sector (dwell time).While aircraft count and dwell time are both components of the Simplified Dynamic Density metric, they do not account for all factors that contribute to air traffic controller workload.For example, having ten aircraft evenly spaced and flying in the same direction in a sector causes less workload than having five aircraft all converging on the same point from different directions.The focus of this study is to evaluate the benefits of using Simplified Dynamic Density as a cost function in Geosect to partition airspace.Benefits are measured in terms of sector capacity and average system delay.Benefits are also measured using the Simplified Dynamic Density metric as a gauge of controller workload.This sort of benefit analysis is similar to that of Zelinski [13].At the time the Zelinski study was conducted, Geosect had not reached the necessary level of maturity to be included in the study.This paper gives a brief overview of the Geosect Airspace Partitioning Tool, followed by an explanation of the cost functions implemented in Geosect.The method by which the cost functions were tested is explained, followed by an analysis of the results.This is then followed by a discussion of future work.Finally, conclusions are drawn from the analysis.
2.D.1-2
Overview of GeosectGeosect partitions or sectorizes airspace using computational geometric techniques.The particular version of Geosect examined in this study uses a top down approach with binary partitions.Given a region of airspace, Geosect partitions that airspace into two sectors.Each of these sectors is then evaluated and, if necessary, partitioned into two smaller sectors.Geosect continues partitioning until the desired number of sectors (an input parameter) has been created.Various geometric constraints ensure that the resulting sector shapes are acceptable to controllers in the presence of the anticipated traffic flow.Geosect's current implementation balances controller workload through the use of a cost function based on aircraft count and dwell times.Geosect begins with a single airspace region (usually the boundaries of an Air Route Traffic Control Center or "Center"), predicted aircraft track hits within the region, polylines representing the dominant air traffic flows through the region (as determined by the user), and the location of major airports and special use airspaces (SUAs) in the region (see Figure 1).In order to partition the region into sectors that are geometrically acceptable to air traffic controllers, Geosect sets up exclusion areas and search nodes.
Figure 1. Geosect Input ComponentsExclusion areas (blue circles in Figure 2) are created around major airports, SUAs, and dominant flow intersections.Geosect does not create partitions that encroach on these exclusion areas.This ensures that critical points such as airports, SUA corners, and dominant flow intersections are not too close to a sector boundary.Moreover, as partitions are tested and accepted by Geosect, exclusion zones are set up around the intersections of the partitions.This prevents the creation of points where four or more sectors meet.Such a point is undesirable because it creates hand-off ambiguities for air traffic controllers.
Figure 2. Exclusion Areas in Cleveland CenterGeosect constructs a series of external and internal search nodes (black squares in Figure 3).The external search nodes are equally spaced on the perimeter of the region to be partitioned.The internal search nodes are placed midway between the dominant flows.The segments joining these search nodes make up the search space for segments of each candidate partition.This ensures two properties of the partition.First, the external search nodes ensure that the partition extends from a point on the perimeter to another point on the perimeter.Second, the internal search nodes constrain bends in the partition to occur as far away from the dominant flows as possible.
Figure 3. Initial Search Nodes in Cleveland CenterGeosect further constrains candidate partitions to those whose orientation is orthogonal to the long axis of the region.Thus, if the region to be partitioned is long and skinny, Geosect will not partition the region 2.D.1-3 into two skinnier sectors.In addition, Geosect excludes candidate partitions that cross dominant flows at small angles (i.e.nearly parallel).Allowing small angles can create hand-off ambiguities for air traffic controllers.Given these geometric constraints, Geosect examines a series of partitions that divide the region into two smaller sectors.The cost function is applied to each of the sub-regions, and the highest cost of the two is associated with the partition.From the set of possible of partitions for a given region, Geosect selects the partition with the lowest cost associated with it.The resulting smaller sectors are then placed on a priority queue, which is ordered by a priority function, for further partitioning.The process of partitioning the highest priority sector in the queue and then adding the resulting smaller sectors back on the queue is repeated until the user-defined number of sectors has been created.
Cost FunctionsThis section describes the cost functions implemented in Geosect for this study.The inputs to the cost functions are aircraft radar track hits.Each track hit includes information on the aircraft's location, altitude, ground speed and heading.The track hits are one minute apart.
Aircraft Count/Dwell Time HybridThe first cost function examined by this study is a hybrid of aircraft dwell time and average aircraft count.The aircraft dwell time is the total time all aircraft spend in a given sector.It is desirable to maximize dwell time to reduce the number of handoffs required between sectors and thus the amount of controller coordination required.Therefore, the dwell time function is implemented as an inverse cost function where lower dwell times translate to higher cost.The aircraft dwell time function tends to create sectors that conform to the dominant flow of traffic.The average aircraft count function is the number of aircraft present in a sector averaged over the period the sectorization will take place.As described in the previous section, each candidate partition is evaluated based on the largest cost of the resulting two sectors.If the number of sectors created is less than half the desired number of sectors, then the aircraft dwell time function is used.After half the desired number of sectors has been created, then the average aircraft count cost function is used to evaluate the candidate partitions.The goal of this hybrid cost function is to create large super-sectors that align with the dominant flows.These super-sectors are then divided into smaller sectors to reduce and balance each controller's workload.The sectorization based on a hybrid of aircraft count and dwell time uses maximum aircraft count as its priority function.Maximum aircraft count is the greatest number of aircraft predicted to be within a sector at any given moment.The sector in the priority queue with the greatest maximum aircraft count is selected as the next sector to partition.
Occupancy Count ComponentThe Simplified Dynamic Density (SDD) metric is a weighted combination of seven components.The first SDD component, occupancy count, is the number of aircraft track hits within a sector averaged over a 15-minute period.More aircraft present in a sector at the same time implies higher controller workload.Occupancy count, x1 s,k , for sector s and 15minute period k is given byx1 s,k = n s,k 15 ,(1)where n s,k is the number of aircraft track hits in s during k.x1 s,k is a component of the SDD cost function.It, along with the other components, appears as a term in Eq. ( 4), shown later in this paper.
Composite Proximity Level ComponentProximity level is a quantification of how close the track hits of two aircraft are to each other in space and time.Aircraft that are predicted to be near each other in time and space could potentially come into conflict and increase the air traffic controller's workload.Even if they do not conflict, aircraft pairs with high proximity levels require monitoring by the air traffic controller.The track hits of each pair of aircraft are compared and assigned a proximity level.Table 1 lists the proximity levels from more severe to less severe.For example, if two aircraft are separated by between 5 and 7.5 nautical miles horizontally and less than 1000 feet vertically, and their track hits' timestamps were less than 10 seconds apart, then the aircraft pair are assigned a proximity level of 2.
2.D.1-4The composite proximity level, x2 s,k , for sector s and 15-minute period k is a composite of the identified Proximity Levels according tox2 s,k = 4 p 1,s,k + 2 p 2,s,k + p 3,s,k + p 4,s,k 4 ,(2)where p 1,x,k , p 2,x,k , p 3,x,k , and p 4,x,k represent the number of level 1, 2, 3, and 4 proximities, respectively.
Altitude Transition Count ComponentAltitude transition count, x3 s,k , is the number of aircraft track hits where the aircraft's absolute altitude change rate is greater than 500 feet per minute.Aircraft that are changing flight levels can increase an air traffic controller's workload as they merge or cross through streams of other aircraft.
Sector Transfer Count ComponentSector transfer count, x4 s,k , is the number of aircraft that enter and exit sector s during 15-minute period k.Note that an aircraft leaving sector r and entering sector s is counted in the sector transfer count for both s and r.Sector transfers require communication and coordination between sector controllers and pilots, and this adds to controller workload.
Sector Density ComponentSector density, x5 s,k , is the number of aircraft track hits in sector s during 15-minute period k (same as occupancy count x1 s,k ) divided by the volume of the sector (in km 3 ).Higher densities imply higher workload because the air traffic controllers have less airspace available to resolve conflicts.
Heading Variance ComponentHeading variance, x6 s,k , is a quantification of the variation in aircraft headings within a sector.The heading variance is given byx6 s,k = 1 N s,k (h i,s,k i=1 N s ,k ∑ -m s,k ) 2 ,(3)where m s,k is the mean of all N s,k headings, h i,s,k , in sector s during 15-minute period k.The motivation behind this metric is that it is easier to control streams of aircraft that are flying in the same direction than aircraft with a variety of headings and potentially crossing trajectories.
Speed Variance ComponentSpeed variance, x7 s,k , is based on the aircraft ground speeds in a manner similar to heading variance.
Simplified Dynamic DensityThe seven components of the SDD are combined in a weighted sum, ⎟ s,k , for sector s and 15-minute period k according toχ s,k = 2.2(x1 s,k ) + 1.2(x2 s,k ) + 0.2(x3 s,k ) + 0.4(x4 s,k ) + 3000(x5 s,k ) + 0.0005(x6 s,k ) + 0.0005(x7 s,k )(4)The SDD cost function, X s , is computed as the mean of ⎟ s,k over all of the 15-minute periods.
Method for Evaluating Cost FunctionsGeosect generated sectors in two altitude strata for Cleveland Center.Cleveland Center was selected for this study because its en route airspace includes a variety of crossing, climbing, and descending air traffic.High altitude sectors covered the first strata from 24,000 to 34,900 feet.Super high sectors 2.D.1-5 covered the second strata from 35,000 to 60,000 feet.This is the same stratification used by most of Cleveland's present day sectorization.The locations of the airports in Detroit, Cleveland, and Pittsburgh were input to Geosect to provide partitioning exclusion zones.Aircraft track hit data were from a day in 2005 that was not impacted by weather and spanned approximately 32 hours.The current sectorization includes 29 total sectors, covering the high and super high altitude strata.Since this averages to 15 sectors per stratum, Geosect was configured to generate 15 sectors for each altitude stratum using the aircraft count/dwell time cost function and the SDD cost function described above.Each Geosect generated sector was evaluated using SDD as the workload measure.Each sector of the current sectorization was similarly evaluated using SDD as the workload measure.The maximum, mean, and standard deviation over all of the sectors were computed for each sectorization.In addition, for each sectorization, the high and super high sectors were input into a simulation using the Airspace Concept Evaluation System (ACES) [14].First, ACES simulated current (2005) levels of air traffic unconstrained by sector capacities.This unconstrained traffic data was then used to compute the Monitor Alert Parameter (MAP) values for each sector.The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) uses MAP values as an indication of sector capacity [15].MAP values range from 5 (lowest capacity) to 18 (highest capacity).Next, ACES simulated the same traffic but imposed delays so that each sector's capacity, as given by its MAP value, was not exceeded.The resulting average delay over the entire system was recorded.
Results and AnalysisThe SDD function is used as the workload measure in the analysis of each Geosect generated sectorization as well as the current day Cleveland sectorization.The maximum is a sectorization's worst-case workload, and the mean is a sectorization's average workload over the entire period under consideration.The standard deviation is interpreted as a sectorization's workload balance among its individual sectors.The smaller the standard deviation, the better the balance.In addition, the average MAP value and average system delay for each sectorization are derived from ACES simulations and compared.
WorkloadFigure 4 shows the maximum SDD measure for each of the sectorizations.(Note that the sectorization based on the aircraft count/dwell time hybrid cost function is abbreviated as AC/DTH in the following figures.)Using SDD as a measure of workload, both Geosect sectorizations had smaller worst-cases than the current sectorization.The sectorization generated by Geosect using SDD as its cost function had the least worst-case.
Capacity and DelayMean MAP values are shown in Figure 7. Interpreting MAP value as an indication of capacity, neither of the Geosect sectorizations had an average sector capacity as high as the current sectorization.However, as shown in Figure 8, the capacity is better balanced between the sectors created by Geosect using the aircraft count/dwell time hybrid than the current day sectors.Given that dwell time is closely related to the computation of MAP values, it makes sense that the aircraft count/dwell time hybrid sectorization scored better than the SDD sectorization.ACES also computed the average system delay for each sectorization, and the results are shown in Figure 9.The current day sectorization has less average delay than either Geosect sectorizations.Among the Geosect generated sectorizations, the aircraft count/dwell time hybrid sectorization had less delay than the SDD sectorization.Again, this may be due to the fact that dwell time is closely related to the MAP value calculations used by ACES.
Summary of ResultsTable 2 summarizes which sectorizations did the best under the various evaluations used in this study.Using the aircraft count/dwell time cost function, Geosect does a good job of balancing workload and capacity.However, current day sectorization outperforms Geosect in the areas of average workload, sector capacity and system delay.Design of the current sectorization is an art form requiring the efforts of an experienced airspace designer who designs the sectors in conjunction with the design of the air traffic routes.As a result, the current sectorization scored well in this study since the traffic used to evaluate the sectorizations followed these routes.Given a different set of traffic that do not follow the routes, either due to weather or some sort of wind-optimized routing, the evaluations may have yielded different results.The current sectorization has also benefited from years of evolution while the design of automated sectorization tools is fairly new.The ACES simulations show that the current sectorization design strives to optimize airspace capacity while reducing system delay.While Geosect does a good job of balancing workload and capacity, further development is required to bring it up to the level of the current sectorization, and this is covered in the next section.
Future WorkWithin each altitude stratum (high and super high), the current day sectorization included sectors that occupied only portions of the stratum.In those cases, sectors overlapped each other with different sectors covering different portions of the altitude stratum.The version of Geosect used in this study was limited by its two-dimensional nature.Each sector created by Geosect was expected to cover the full altitude stratum, and the stratum is specified by the user.A future study should look at using Geosect to generate three-dimensional sectors, where Geosect would pick its own altitude strata.The resulting sectors would overlap would not necessarily all have the same floors and ceilings.At the time of this study, the dominant flows used by Geosect were created by hand.In future, Geosect will use automatically generated dominant flows.This will make dominant flows more consistent between different Centers, and will make Geosect easier to use with different altitude strata.Finally, at the time of this study, the user specified how many sectors for Geosect to generate.A future enhancement would allow Geosect to create an undetermined number of sectors until some criterion was met.This would alleviate the problem 2.D.1-8 of small sectors being generated merely because Geosect had not reached its user-specified limit.
ConclusionTwo sets of sectorizations of Cleveland Center were generated by Geosect using different cost functions.These sectorizations and the current day sectorization were compared by applying the Simplified Dynamic Density measure (representing workload) to each sector.In addition, the Airspace Concept Evaluation System was used to simulate current air traffic.From these simulations, sector capacity and average system delay were computed for each sectorization.Geosect generated sectorizations using the aircraft count/dwell time hybrid cost function gave a better workload balance and sector capacity balance than the current sectorization.The sectorization resulting from the Simplified Dynamic Density cost function had a lower maximum workload measure than the other sectorizations.However, Geosect's sectorizations incurred greater delay and did not generate as much sector capacity as the current sectorization.Figure 5 Figure 6 Figure 6 .566Figure 4. Maximum SDDFigure5shows the mean SDD measure for each of the sectorizations.The current sectorization has a significantly smaller average workload than either of the Geosect sectorizations.Geosect's average workload was slightly lower using the SDD cost function versus the sectorization based on the aircraft count/dwell time hybrid.
Figure 8 .8Figure 7. Mean MAP Value
Figure 9 .9Figure 9. Average System Delay
Table 1 . Proximity Level Criteria1VerticalHorizontalTimeProx.SeparationSeparationSeparationLevel(ft.)(nm)(seconds)1< 1000< 5< 102< 10005 to 7.5< 10< 5< 203< 10007.5 to 10< 105 to 7.5< 20< 5< 304any< 5< 10
Table 2 . Summary of the Best Sectorizations2ComparisonBest Sectorizationmaximum workloadSDDaverage workloadcurrentaircraft count/workload balancedwell time hybridAverage Sector Capacity currentaircraft count/Sector Capacity BalanceDwell time hybridAverage System Delaycurrent
		
		

			
AcknowledgementsThe author thanks Girishkumar Sabhnani at State University of New York (SUNY) at Stony Brook (now at Metron Aviation) for his assistance and expertise with Geosect, and Charlene Cayabyab for her ACES support at NASA Ames Research Center.
			

			
Email AddressesGregory L. Wong: Gregory.L.Wong@nasa.gov28th Digital Avionics Systems Conference October [25][26][27][28][29]2009			
			

				


	
		Dynamic Density: An Air Traffic Management Metric
		
			IVLaudeman
		
		
			SGShelden
		
		
			RBranstrom
		
		
			CLBrasil
		
		NASA- TM-1998-112226
		
			April 1998
			Moffett Field, California
		
	
	Laudeman, I. V., S. G. Shelden, R. Branstrom, C. L. Brasil, April 1998, Dynamic Density: An Air Traffic Management Metric, NASA- TM-1998-112226, Moffett Field, California.



	
		Integration of Traffic Flow Management Decisions
		
			BanavarSridhar
		
		
			GanoChatterji
		
		
			ShonGrabbe
		
		
			KapilSheth
		
		10.2514/6.2002-5014
	
	
		AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference and Exhibit
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			
			
		
	
	Sridhar, B., K. S. Sheth, S. Grabbe, 1-4



	
		Relationship between Air Traffic Demand, Safety and Complexity in High-Density Airspace in Europe
		
			TamaraPejovic
		
		
			FedjaNetjasov
		
		
			DusanCrnogorac
		
		10.5772/intechopen.88801
	
	
		Risk Assessment in Air Traffic Management
		Orlando, Florida
		
			IntechOpen
			December 1998
		
	
	December 1998, Airspace Complexity and its Application in Air Traffic Management, 2nd USA/Europe Air Traffic Management R&D Seminar, Orlando, Florida.



	
		Measures for air traffic controller workload prediction
		
			GanoChatterji
		
		
			BanavarSridhar
		
		10.2514/6.2001-5242
		AIAA-2001-5242
	
	
		1st AIAA, Aircraft, Technology Integration, and Operations Forum
		Los Angeles, California
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			16-18 October 2001
		
	
	Measures for Air Traffic Controller Workload Prediction
	Chatterji, G. B., B. Sridhar, 16-18 October 2001, Measures for Air Traffic Controller Workload Prediction, AIAA-2001-5242, Proceedings of the First AIAA Aircraft Technology, Integration, and Operations Forum, Los Angeles, California.



	
		Dynamic density: measuring and predicting sector complexity [ATC]
		
			PKopardekar
		
		
			SMagyarits
		
		10.1109/dasc.2002.1067920
	
	
		Proceedings. The 21st Digital Avionics Systems Conference
		The 21st Digital Avionics Systems ConferenceBudapest, Hungary
		
			IEEE
			June 2003
		
	
	Kopardekar, P., S. Magyarits,, June 2003, Measurement and Prediction of Dynamic Density, 5th USA/Europe Air Traffic Management R&D Seminar, Budapest, Hungary.



	
		Dynamic Density and Complexity Metrics for Realtime Traffic Flow Management, 5th USA
		
			AMasalonis
		
		
			MCallaham
		
		
			CWanke
		
	
	
		Europe Air Traffic Management R&D Seminar
		
			June 2003
			Budapest, Hungary
		
	
	Masalonis, A., M. Callaham, C. Wanke, June 2003, Dynamic Density and Complexity Metrics for Realtime Traffic Flow Management, 5th USA/Europe Air Traffic Management R&D Seminar, Budapest, Hungary.



	
		
		
			PKopardekar
		
		
			ASchwartz
		
		
			SMagyarits
		
		
			JRhodes
		
	
	
		Airspace Complexity Measurement: an Air Traffic Control Simulation Analysis, 7th USA
		
			2-5 July 2007
			Barcelona, Spain
		
	
	Europe Air Traffic Management R&D Seminar
	Kopardekar, P., A. Schwartz, S. Magyarits, J. Rhodes, 2-5 July 2007, Airspace Complexity Measurement: an Air Traffic Control Simulation Analysis, 7th USA/Europe Air Traffic Management R&D Seminar, Barcelona, Spain.



	
		Dynamic Airspace Configuration Analysis, Deliverables for Subtasks 13 & 14 under Contract GS-35F-0308K; Order No. A65616D
		
			SKlein
		
		
			MRodgers
		
		
			HKaing
		
		
			PLucic
		
		
			KLeiden
		
	
	
		Final Report Part
		
			3
			3 December 2008
			NASA Ames Research Center
			Moffett Field, California
		
	
	DAG CE-6 Golden Nuggets Fast-Time Modeling and Simulation Studies
	Klein, S., M. Rodgers, H. Kaing, P. Lucic, K. Leiden, 3 December 2008, DAG CE-6 Golden Nuggets Fast-Time Modeling and Simulation Studies, Final Report Part 3: Dynamic Airspace Configuration Analysis, Deliverables for Subtasks 13 & 14 under Contract GS-35F-0308K; Order No. A65616D, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California.



	
		Simplified dynamic density: A metric for dynamic airspace configuration and NextGen analysis
		
			AlexanderKlein
		
		
			MarkDRodgers
		
		
			KennethLeiden
		
		10.1109/dasc.2009.5347539
	
	
		2009 IEEE/AIAA 28th Digital Avionics Systems Conference
		Orlando, Florida
		
			IEEE
			
		
	
	Klein, A., M. Rodgers, K. Leiden, Simplified Dynamic Density: a Metric for Dynamic Airspace Configuration and NEXTGEN Analysis, 28 th Digital Avionics Systems Conference, Orlando, Florida.



	
		Dynamic Airspace Configuration Management Based on Computational Geometry Techniques
		
			JoeMitchell
		
		
			GirishkumarSabhnani
		
		
			RobertHoffman
		
		
			JimmyKrozel
		
		
			ArashYousefi
		
		10.2514/6.2008-7225
	
	
		AIAA Guidance, Navigation and Control Conference and Exhibit
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			
		
	
	Mitchell, J. S. B., G. Sabhnani, J. Krozel, R.



	
		
			AHoffman
		
		
			Yousefi
		
		Dynamic Airspace Configuration Management based on Computational Geometry Techniques, AIAA 2008-7225, AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference
		Honolulu, Hawaii
		
			18-21 August 2008
		
	
	Hoffman, A. Yousefi, 18-21 August 2008, Dynamic Airspace Configuration Management based on Computational Geometry Techniques, AIAA 2008- 7225, AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference, Honolulu, Hawaii.



	
		Geometric Algorithms for Optimal Airspace Design and Air Traffic Controller Workload Balancing
		
			AmitabhBasu
		
		
			JosephS BMitchell
		
		
			GirishkumarSabhnani
		
		10.1137/1.9781611972887.8
	
	
		2008 Proceedings of the Tenth Workshop on Algorithm Engineering and Experiments (ALENEX)
		SIAM Proceedings in Applied Mathematics
		
			Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
			2008. 2008
			
		
	
	Basu, A., J. S. B. Mitchell, G. Sabhnani, 2008, Geometric Algorithms for Optimal Airspace Design and Air Traffic Controller Workload Balancing, Proc. Tenth Workshop on Algorithm Engineering and Experiments, ALENEX'08, SIAM Proceedings in Applied Mathematics, (Journal version submitted to ACM Journal of Experimental Algorithmics, 2008).



	
		Geometric Algorithms for Optimal Airspace Design and Air Traffic Controller Workload Balancing
		
			AmitabhBasu
		
		
			JosephS BMitchell
		
		
			GirishkumarSabhnani
		
		10.1137/1.9781611972887.8
	
	
		2008 Proceedings of the Tenth Workshop on Algorithm Engineering and Experiments (ALENEX)
		Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts
		
			Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
			10-11 November 2006
			
		
	
	Basu, A., J. S. B. Mitchell, G. Sabhnani, 10- 11 November 2006, Geometric Algorithms for Optimal Airspace Design and Air Traffic Controller Workload Balancing, Proc. 16th Fall Workshop on Computational and Combinatorial Geometry, Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts.



	
		Geometric Algorithms for Dynamic Airspace Sectorization
		
			GRSabhnani
		
		
			2009
			Stony Brook, New York
		
		
			PhD Dissertation, Stony Brook University
		
	
	Sabhnani, G. R., 2009, Geometric Algorithms for Dynamic Airspace Sectorization. PhD Dissertation, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York.



	
		A Comparison of Algorithm Generated Sectorizations
		
			ShannonZelinski
		
		10.2514/atcq.18.3.279
	
	
		Air Traffic Control Quarterly
		Air Traffic Control Quarterly
		1064-3818
		2472-5757
		
			18
			3
			
			29 June -2 July, 2009
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA)
			Napa, California
		
	
	Zelinski, S., 29 June -2 July, 2009, A Comparison of Algorithm Generated Sectorizations, Eighth USA/Europe Air Traffic Management 2.D.1-9 Research and Development Seminar (ATM2009), Napa, California.



	
		Build 4 of the Airspace Concept Evaluation System
		
			LarryMeyn
		
		
			RobertWindhorst
		
		
			KarlinRoth
		
		
			DonaldVan Drei
		
		
			GregKubat
		
		
			VikramManikonda
		
		
			SharleneRoney
		
		
			GeorgeHunter
		
		
			AlexHuang
		
		
			GeorgeCouluris
		
		10.2514/6.2006-6110
	
	
		AIAA Modeling and Simulation Technologies Conference and Exhibit
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			
		
	
	Meyn, L., R. Windhorst, K. Roth, D. Van



	
		
			GDrei
		
		
			VKubat
		
		
			SManikonda
		
		
			GRoney
		
		
			AHunter
		
		
			GHuang
		
		
			Couluris
		
		Build 4 of the Airspace Concept Evaluation System, AIAA 2006-6110, AIAA Modeling and Simulation Technologies Conference
		Keystone, Colorado
		
			August 2006
			
		
	
	Federal Aviation Administration. Order JO
	Drei, G. Kubat, V. Manikonda, S. Roney, G. Hunter, A. Huang, G. Couluris, 21-24 August 2006, Build 4 of the Airspace Concept Evaluation System, AIAA 2006-6110, AIAA Modeling and Simulation Technologies Conference, Keystone, Colorado. [15] Federal Aviation Administration, Order JO



	
		Examining Change
		10.4135/9781483329680.n4
		
	
	
		Schools That Change: Evidence-Based Improvement and Effective Change Leadership
		
			Corwin Press
			2008. March 12, 2009
			8
			
		
	
	Monitor Alert Parameter
	3V, 2008, Section 8. Monitor Alert Parameter, [online publication] URL: http://www.faa.gov/air_traffic/publications/atp ubs/FAC/Ch17/s1708.html, effective date: February 14, 2008, includes change effective July 31, 2008 and change 2 effective March 12, 2009.


				
			
		
	
