
	
	
		
I. IntroductionN current air traffic operations, it is difficult for users of airspace (e.g.airlines, cargo operators, General Aviation, etc.) to convey their flight planning preferences.This is due to unavailability of electronic data exchange and negotiation mechanisms.In general, the FAA or the air traffic management community does not know these preferences due to their proprietary nature.During times of congestion and airport constraints, traffic managers often impose changes to flight plans which do not incorporate users' preferences. 1,2he FAA is working with the users to develop technology and new software that would allow users to provide their preferences of flight priority, routes and schedule.One of the technologies allows users to specify alternate route options in addition to the primary route used in current operations.Automation supported by the FAA would evaluate how each of the route options satisfy local airspace and airport capacity constraints. 3This technology would provide flexibility for users to fly their planes based on their individual business models.However, this approach solves the problem in a small region of airspace but may create congestion elsewhere.It could lead to additional constraints, which may be difficult to manage. 4In addition, market-based approaches have been studied to explore the incorporation of user preferences.In Ref. 5, optimization of a market mechanism is studied for airlines competing for airspace resources and an equilibrium solution is investigated.Ball, et al. 6 present the need for including user priorities in an efficient future air traffic management system.The unavailability of user preferences is a significant obstacle in computing equitable schedules for the current air traffic system. 7,8his paper presents the process and results of human-in-the-loop simulations to incorporate user preferences in pre-departure flight planning.The experiments were conducted at NASA Ames Research Center during Jan. 26-28,  2010.The participants were certified dispatchers working at major airlines.The experiments utilized a flight prioritization scheme for multiple routes.The credits-based concept used for prioritization was proposed in Refs.9,10.Various scenarios were presented to dispatchers who provided a number of credits (a measure of importance of their flights), which were used pre-departure to schedule and route their flights.Metrics of delay, fuel consumption, credit balance, and equity were computed.In Section II, the credits concept is described.The air traffic data used and the scenarios used to elicit dispatcher input are described in Section III.The roles and responsibilities of the air traffic management coordinator and the flight dispatcher are presented there as well.The metrics and results are presented in Sections V and VI, respectively.The paper ends with a few concluding remarks.The questionnaire presented to each participant in the experiments is included in the Appendix.
II. Credits Concept and Simulation ArchitectureIn order to analyze the feasibility and benefits of the credits concept, a new software architecture was developed.The Future ATM Concepts Evaluation Tool (FACET) software, 11 developed at NASA Ames Research Center, was used as the National Airspace System (NAS) simulation environment.Utilizing the FACET Application Programming Interface 12 , a client-server architecture called the equitable Credit-based User Preference System (e-CUPS) was developed for conducting the experiments.The credits concept, FACET and e-CUPS are described next.
A. Credits ConceptCredits 10 are a form of artificial currency and are used for specifying users' flight planning preferences.The purpose is to incorporate users' flight priorities, multiple route options, cruise altitude, and departure time during the pre-departure route filing process.The concept could be applied in a 15-minute, two-hour or day long traffic scenario.At the beginning of each planning scenario, the users are provided a fixed number of credits based on the size of their operations.The credits expire at the end of each scenario.The total number of credits allocated for each user is five times the number of flights planned to depart during the scenario.There is not a limit on the number of credits a user can assign to a given flight other than the airline's available credit balance.Each user ranks flights using his or her own utility function.The user utility function could depend on flight distance, number of passengers, type of aircraft, load factor, crew connection, etc. Users are allowed to assign different credit values across several route choices for a given flight.Once the users assign credits for each route choice of each flight, the credits and routes are submitted to an automated server.Presumably, this server would reside with the FAA or an impartial entity.The server simulation process flies all flights from origin to destination and identifies regions of excess demand over capacity.Wherever there is excess demand, say in a sector, a credit ranking of all flights using that sector is done.The sector is utilized to capacity by the higher credit flights.The lowest credit flights over capacity are assigned their next route preference, and the entire simulation is run again.If no additional route options are available for any flight, it is held on the ground at the origin airport by a fixed amount of time (typically, 15 minutes).The credits corresponding to the granted route are decremented from the user's total allocation of credits.This iterative process is continued until there are no regions with excess demand.The credit assignments of each user are submitted to the server process and are not known to other users.
B. NAS Simulation EnvironmentFACET is a nation-wide air traffic simulation environment.Airport and airspace capacity constraints can be simulated for thousands of aircraft flying in the NAS.The capacities of airspace sectors and airport arrival/departure rates are obtained from the FAA's Enhanced Traffic Management System (ETMS) 13 .Aircraft can be simulated flying through (if permissible) or around the constraints.Pre-departure, the aircraft are rerouted if alternate routes are available.The flights can also be rerouted in the air or delays can be imposed on the ground by delaying a flight's departure time.A snapshot of FACET's display is shown in Fig. 1 with air traffic, convective weather and some special user airspaces.
C. Client-Server ArchitectureThe equitable Credit-based User Preference System (e-CUPS) architecture is designed as a client/server application, which is built on an asynchronous messaging framework.The server is able to support dozens of clients.The clients only connect to a single server.In general, the system is event-driven with clients responding to events generated by the server and the server reacting asynchronously to responses from clients.The client and server are both Java applications using a Swing user interface.All clients and the server embed their own distinct copy of FACET.The clients use FACET to plan routes between origin/destination airport pairs, to provide the server with a set of optional routes that it can consider when scheduling a flight, and to specify their priorities using credits.The server uses FACET to determine which flights are scheduled to depart during a scenario, as well as any sector and airport constraints that may lead to delays.Additionally, all clients and the server are backed by a MySQL database, which is used to retrieve alternative routes for various origin/destination airport pairs and to store all the metrics that get captured during the simulation.The metrics data are read and processed post execution to study the user's performance and the overall behavior of the system.
III. Scenario and Experiment DescriptionThis section describes the air traffic data and the scenarios presented to the participants for conducting the simulation experiments.The experiment scenarios with number of flights and the associated constraints are presented first.The roles and responsibilities of the traffic manager and the dispatchers are described next.
A. ScenariosAir traffic data from Aug. 24, 2005 was obtained from ETMS and simulated in FACET.Heavy traffic volume during the hours of 3 to 7 pm Eastern Daylight Time (EDT) was used to create the experiment scenarios.A traffic scenario consisted of one through four 15-minute periods.In each scenario, the number of participating users and number of flights per user per period were varied.As shown in Table 1, five different air traffic scenarios were created based on number of flights for the top five users in the NAS.These scenarios were derived from the baseline Aug. 24, 2005 traffic data by selecting the corresponding number of total flights (last column in Table 1.)
B. Experiment RunsScenarios 1 through 3 were used to familiarize the users with the communication interfaces and displays for preference submission.Scenarios 4 through 5 were used to conduct the experiments, as described in Table 2 below.The constraints imposed on all airspace sectors are shown as Sector capacities (column 2).For scenarios 1 through 4, the constraints were imposed on all sectors.For example, in scenario 4, only 30% of sector nominal capacities were allowed.The last scenario (number 5) contained flights in the air at the beginning and sector constraints were imposed based on presence of weather.In that scenario, only sectors with any weather present had their capacity reduced to 60% of the nominal value.In future, the sector capacities would be incorporated from other weather translation models available in literature. 4The number of credits made available were based on the number of departures in each 15-minute period or in lump-sum at the beginning.Lastly, the departure delay imposed on flights was either 5-or 15-minutes, as shown in the last column of Table 2.The experiments did not additionally constrain airport arrival and departure rates.Therefore, the users had reduced capacity airspace sectors but 100% of nominal airport capacities.Another limitation of the experiments was the absence of uncertainty in weather data.The experiments were run with actual weather as it occurred on that day.Uncertainty plays a key role in flight route decision-making.However, for the current simulations, the goal was to assess the feasibility of the credits concept and to elicit user preferences.Handling of uncertainty was considered beyond the scope of these experiments.Additional simulations are planned in which weather forecasts will be included, instead of the current weather data.
C. Roles and Responsibilities of ParticipantsNASA researchers developed the traffic scenarios.They provided the traffic manager with a set of sector capacities to apply so that the dispatchers had increasing workload as experiments progressed.For example, for scenario 3, capacities of 10%, 15% and 20% were suggested, with the proposed impact on traffic and dispatcher workload.The air traffic manager was responsible for selecting airspace capacities from this set and specifying to the dispatchers.The final selected values are shown under 'Sector capacities' column in Table 2.In the future, these capacities would be suggested to the manager from weather translation models 4 .The manager presented the traffic scenarios, and imposed delay parameters, as shown in the last column of Table 2.He also decided on when to start and end each period of each scenario.The display used by the manager is shown in Fig. 2. The upper panel (under "Session Configuration Parameters") has comments for the scenario and database file names.The periods are shown The dispatchers, on the other hand, were responsible for filing flight plans and corresponding credits for all their flights.A scenario consisted of several periods of 15 minutes each.The dispatchers worked on a number of flights departing during each period.They had to account for location of congestion and number of credits to assign for each flight (and possibly, each optional route of each flight) for maximum throughput and minimum delay.The displays used by the dispatchers are shown in Figs. 3 and4 (below).The top graphic in Fig. 3 shows the details for all the periods, including the current period (with the "Submission Window Opened" displayed) shown with a blue box.The first two periods are closed and the user was able to fly all of their flights with no delays, as shown by the orange dashed box.The opening balance (number of credits available for each user) and credits charged in the previous two periods is shown.The credit balance for the current period is presented at the top right (140, in this case).The particular user shown (DAL, in this case) has 28 departures in this period, shown above the blue box in the center.This display shows an overview of most relevant information about all the flights handled by the dispatcher in this scenario.The bottom graphic in Fig. 3 shows details of flights departing in the current period.The dispatcher had to provide their priorities through the assignment of credits for these flights.The user has 140 credits available and if the default assignments using a distance-based utility function were chosen, the dispatcher would use up 136 credits for the flights.By double-clicking any row corresponding to a flight, the user was able to view additional details of that flight, in a new pop-up window shown in Fig. 4. If the user checks the box on left of flight id, the user knows that that flight is expected to encounter congestion in the airspace.The user may then either increase the number of credits assigned to that flight or may provide additional route options until the submission window is "Closed."The top graphic in Fig. 4 shows flight plan details for a single and selected flight (blue in bottom graphic of Fig. 3).This graphic allowed the dispatchers to modify the route options filed for this flight, the number of credits assigned, departure time, and the cruising altitude, shown within the purple box.The ability to select alternate routes from a database ("Alternate Routes…" button) or to create new routes (by typing in the text field at the bottom) is available in this graphical interface.The users also had the ability to view the database routes or newly created routes by selecting the corresponding check box (under 'Show'), displayed within the green dashed box.Once the check box is selected, FACET displays the checked routes.This is shown in the bottom graphic of Fig. 4.The dispatcher would submit the preferences once the credits and flight plans are selected for each of the departing flights in the current period (shown by pink box in the bottom graphic of Fig. 3).This information for each dispatcher was made available to the server process.The traffic manager at this point would close the period and no additional changes were allowed.The iterative simulation runs (see section II.A) would then begin until a convergent solution is obtained (within 5 seconds to five minutes, depending on the scenario).Then the next period submission would open, until all periods in the scenario are completed.
IV. MetricsTo analyze the system and users' performance, several metrics were computed.Each of these metrics is presented in this Section.Some of the metrics were computed from a user perspective only, while others made sense from both user and operator perspectives.Each of the metrics described in Sections IV.A through IV.E was made available to the users at the end of each scenario.Even though the results are presented for the 'DAL' user, there was no participant from Delta Airlines.
A. DelayThe delays in the system were computed for all the flights and for each of the participating users.The total, mean and maximum delay values were recorded for participating users.The computed delays from system and user perspectives are presented in histograms (departure delays only) as well as numbers (departure delays and difference from originally filed route airborne delays) in top half of Fig. 5 below.
B. Fuel ConsumptionFor each of the participating users' flights, the fuel consumption required to reach destination was computed.The mean, maximum and difference from baseline (filed route) values of fuel consumption were recorded.The fuel consumption was computed based on the aircraft performance tables available within FACET.The fuel consumption values are presented from a user's fleet perspective only and are presented in the third panel from top on the left in Fig. 5.
C. EquityA coefficient for inequality in a distribution was used for computing equity of delay distribution.Gini coefficient 14 , G, was computed from a system perspective (for each user) and from a user perspective (for each flight in the fleet).It is defined as:€ G = i =1 n ∑ j =1 n ∑ i x -j x 2 2 n µ (1)where, n = number of flights or users, x = maximum delay, and µ = mean of delays.The Gini coefficient values vary from zero to one.Zero means that there were no differences between xs in the distribution, and one means there were high differences between xs in the distribution.For equitable delay distribution across all the users, the Gini coefficient for system delays should be closer to zero.On the other hand, a Gini coefficient closer to one is desired for a user's fleet.The goal is to unevenly distribute delays based on priorities between various flights for each user.
D. CreditsDue to the implementation details of the credits concept, it was conveyed to the users to use their credits wisely.The credits expired at the end of each scenario, however, the users can only assign from their allocated credit balance.A plot of credits used and available credit balance after each period was presented.This is shown in the bottom left graphic of Fig. 5.
E. Performance IndexThe user performance index, S, was based solely on the delay incurred for the user compared to the system-wide delay of all users.This index is defined as follows:€ S = 1- D user D system                   *100 (2)where, S is between 0 and 100%, D user is the total delay incurred by each user, and D system is the sum of delays of participating users.The performance index, S, is shown in the Fig. 5 by a thermometer at the bottom right.Each of the users' performance was indicated at the end of a scenario by a color and a percent value.The colors of red, orange and green for < 33%, 34-67% and > 68%, respectively, were used.It is acknowledged that S is not a satisfactory representation of the performance since it does not include the fuel consumption of users flights.
V. ResultsAll of the metrics described above were computed for the experiments.The scenarios one through four were more didactic and intended for concept understanding and system awareness for the participants.At the end of each scenario, a pictorial image of the results was presented to the participants.Figure 5 shows the reader this image for the more elaborate scenario 5 used in experiment 7. Table 3 reports results for all users in experiment 7. The results of the survey presented to the users are described in section B.
A. Experiment resultsFigure 5 shows the image displayed to the dispatchers at the end of experiment 7 with scenario 5 (see Tables 1 and2 for details.)This figure has three panels.The upper panel has two bar charts ('System Departure Delay' and DAL Departure Delay'), the middle panel has four tables with numbers 'System Delay Statistics, 'DAL Delay Statistics', 'DAL Fuel Consumption', and 'Gini Coefficient'), and the bottom panel has a bar chart at left ('DAL Credits') and a thermometer ('Performance Index') at right.The system-wide departure delay only for all participating users is shown in the upper left panel of Fig. 5.The xaxis shows periods one through five (as 200508…) The red bars indicate the results for experiment 7 (denoted 'This_session').The blue bars show the results (previously computed) with all flights assigned five credits (denoted 'SCEN5_C5_S60_D15_UNI_1'.)The green bars represent the performance with a distance-based utility function (denoted 'SCEN5_C5_S60_D15_DIST_1'.) The departure delay (without the airborne delay) for one user (DAL) is shown in the top right panel.As mentioned earlier, even though the results are presented for the 'DAL' user, there was no participant from Delta Airlines.It is observed here that the delay is minimal (red bar) during all five periods (along x-axis) compared to the other two methods of credit assignment (blue and green bars).For all tables in middle panel of Fig. 5, a comparison is provided with the previously computed five credits and distance-based credit assignments in rows 1 and 2, respectively.The results for experiment 7 are denoted with 'HITL_SCEN5_C5_SW60…' The upper left table in the middle panel of Fig. 5 shows system delay statistics for departure delays as well as additional optional route airborne delays combined.For experiment 7, the system delays were larger (825 minutes) compared to the five credits (row 1) value of 780 minutes, but lower than the distancebased function (row 2) of 888 minutes.The upper right table shows those values for the individual user.Clearly, the DAL user was able to reduce delays significantly from 90 in row 1 and 133 in row 2 to 43 minutes for his fleet, in this experiment.Since the DAL user had 160 flights in the scenario, the mean value of delay is less than 1 (rounded to 0) under Mean delay column.The fuel consumption values are shown in the bottom left table in the middle panel of Fig. 5.The dispatcher was able to further reduce the fuel consumption from 1135 in row 1 and 363 in row 2 to 7150 lbs of savings in this experiment.The bottom right table shows the Gini coefficient values.Due to an error in the software, the system values in the image were subtracted from 1. Thus, the correct values for System-maximum and System-average should be 0.16 (G=1.0-0.84) and 0.15 (G=1.0-0.85) for rows 1 and 2, respectively.For experiment 7, these values should be 0.13 for System maximum and average both.From the values shown, it appears that system was able to distribute system (maximum and average) delays fairly well among users.The user, on the other hand, achieved a Gini coefficient of 0.99, which implies the delays among his fleet were very unevenly distributed.Both of these are desired outcomes.The bar chart in lower panel shows the credits expenditure (blue bars) with the periods along the x-axis.The user chose to spend credits more evenly through the periods, even though more credits (red bars) were available (due to larger number of departures) earlier.For this experiment, the credits were allocated each period, and not lump-sum at the beginning of the scenario.The allocation of credits, lump-sum at the beginning or for each period, is an open question and is being considered in current research.The participants overall preferred a lump-sum allocation, which provided them with higher flexibility in prioritizing flights.The bottom right panel shows the user performance index.This user achieved a 95% value, which represents very low 'DAL' fleet delay compared to the system delay.There were very few runs where the individual users achieved between 50 and 65%, but once the concept of operations was clear to them, they were able to achieve 65% or higher value.The results for all metrics for experiment 7 using scenario 5 are presented in Table 3.The DAL user shown in Fig. 5 is User 2 in Table 3.It is observed that User 1 incurred a significant portion of the delay.The reason is that the user mostly assigned five credits to all flights for all routes.User 4 also incurred significant delays.The reason for this was that several of the users flights were competing for the same resources.Another important result is that two users were able to reduce their fuel consumption compared to the baseline filed routes.Lastly, each of the users was able to achieve a high Gini coefficient.This implies that they were able to distribute delays unevenly within their own fleet.Another interesting result is shown in Fig. 6.The idea behind the credits concept is for users to be able to  distribute the delays based on their priorities for individual flights.The benefit to the system is that a flightprioritized schedule is available which satisfies the system constraints.In Fig. 6, delays are shown as a function of assigned credits to individual flights.Each marker represents several flights.The number of flights for each marker is described in the legend in Fig. 6 and is as follows.The five colored markers of light blue, darker blue, purple, light pink and dark pink represent 1-10, 11-20, 21-30, 31-40 and more than 40 flights, respectively.There are a total of 530 flight delays shown in Fig. 6.It is seen that the delays were more for flights with lower credit assignments.It's observed that almost all flights with higher than six credits had less than 10 minutes of delay.Thus, the data in Fig. 6 conveys that the users were able to distribute the delays fairly well using the credit assignments in this concept.
B. Survey resultsThe users were provided with a survey at the end of each scenario.The survey questions are shown in the Appendix.The survey was Internet based, and had the ability to tabulate the results and provide statistics.Figures 7 and8 show the results of the survey for overall satisfaction of flight utility parameters and overall experience with simulation parameters, respectively.The figures show the factors considered and the corresponding number of responses received (noted under the % value).Darker shading of boxes indicates higher number of responses received for that ranking.A ranking of 5 (in the column header) implies strongly agree, while a ranking of 3 and 1 implies neutral and strongly disagree, respectively.Since the number of responses were sparse, the average rating values are not statistically significant.However, schedule integrity with a score of 4.5 was the most important flight parameter out of 10 considered here.Crew connection was the next importance parameter.Figure 8 shows credit balancing with a score of 4.1 making it the most important simulation feature.Route search (for optional routes) and delay management were rated high for the simulation experience.Weather display was inadequate and needed additional information.Results presented in the figures are an aggregate of all the scenarios and across the five dispatchers.Other than the questions 14 and 16, the dispatchers provided feedback on other questions in the Appendix as well.There was general consensus that the users were able to distribute delays as desired without incurring excessive delays (questions 9 and 10).They all learned more about the credits concept and its implementation with each new scenario.This led them to conclude that they preferred a lump-sum allocation of credits at the beginning of the scenario, instead of getting credits allocated at the beginning of each period of the scenario (questions 19 and 20).There was an undisputed positive agreement on the feasibility and benefits of the credits concept as a flight prioritization mechanism (questions 21 and 22), as applicable to their operations.There was generally agreed needFigure 1 .1Figure 1.A snapshot of FACET simulation environment.
Figure 2 .2Figure 2. The traffic manager user interfaces for flights and constraint management.
Figure 3 .3Figure 3.The dispatcher user interfaces for flights and constraint management.The top graphic shows the period details.The bottom graphic shows flight plan details for the selected flight (in blue in bottom window) along with all the flights in the current period.
Figure 4 .4Figure 4.The dispatcher user interfaces for individual flight handling.The top graphic shows all the route details.The bottom graphic shows details of the alternate routes for a flight under consideration.
Fig. 5 .5Fig. 5. Metrics display to users and traffic manager.The figure shows delays (system and individual, credits usage (for each user) and a satisfaction index.
Fig. 6 .6Fig. 6.Delay distribution for all the users as a function of number of credits assigned.
Fig. 7 .7Fig. 7. Results showing overall satisfaction index of flight utility parameter.

Table 1 . Description of air traffic scenarios.1Scenario numberPeriodsUsersFlights per User per PeriodTotal flights1152102254403455100445114, 105, 86, 159, 665305463Varying, with flights in air at start3026(5 participating)and including background traffic
Table 2 . Description of experiment runs.2table (under "Period Configuration Parameters") with period times, total number of departures and corresponding number of flights.It also provides delays in previous periods and causes for those delays.ExperimentScenarioSector capacitiesCredits availabilityDelay imposed11100%Each period15 minutes22100%Each period15 minutes3315%Each period15 minutes4315%Entire scenario15 minutes5315%Each period5 minutes6430%Each period15 minutes7560%Each period15 minutes
Table 3 . All metrics computed for experiment 7 with scenario 5.3Participant TotalMaximumDeltaMeanMaximumGiniPerformanceDelayDelayFuelFuelFuelcoefficientIndexUser 1315471513910162543410.9661.82User 24317-715010013593580.9994.79User 3145-127758181379660.9898.30User 431049176965668252950.9662.43User 51282049259935540940.9584.49
		
		

			
AcknowledgmentsThe authors wish to thank the dispatchers who participated in the experiments.The experiments provided excellent insight into the concept of operations and software framework, which would not have been possible otherwise.Thanks are also due to Dr. Shon Grabbe and Dr. Banavar Sridhar for extended discussions on feasibility of the credits concept and its benefits.The authors also wish to thank Ms. Jennifer Lock for continuous support of the FACET software and the associated API.
			

			
for incorporating airport arrival and departure rate constraints, uncertainty of weather forecasts and automation support for filing of alternate routes in the next set of human-in-the-loop simulation experiments.
VI. Concluding RemarksA credit-based concept of operations for incorporating user preferences has been developed in earlier research.The assignment of credits provides a mechanism for users to define their flight delay distribution based on their business models.The concept was tested in a human-in-the-loop simulation environment at NASA.The objective was to gather airspace users' flight preferences while dealing with airspace congestion management.Five dispatchers currently employed at major airlines participated in the experiments and provided flight prioritization through the use of credits.For the purpose of assessing the user and system performance, flight delays, fuel consumption and equity metrics were computed.From each of the metrics captured, it was clear that the user specified flight priorities performed better than the schedule-based (five credits each) utilities.The system was able to reach a solution within a reasonable time, while satisfying airspace constraints.The users were also able to distribute delays within their fleet by assigning credits based on their priorities.The users were able to keep flight delays below 10 minutes by assigning higher credits to more important flights.The importance of flights was largely dependent on ten factors, led by schedule integrity and flight connectivity.Users provided feedback that they preferred lump-sum allocation of credits for better flight operations.There was undisputed agreement that the concept of credits was feasible and beneficial, with the help of additional automation.
AppendixAn Internet-based survey system was used for this study.This website allows the survey results to be tabulated and graphed in a manner suitable for post-operations analysis.Several questions were yes/no type, others were categories of agreement and the rest required some explanation of their answers.The survey questions presented to users are shown below.1. Please enter the scenario number:			
			

				


	
		Category Manager
		10.4135/9781452229669.n574
	
	
		Please enter the user category
		
			SAGE Publications, Inc.
			
		
	
	Traffic Manager, Dispatcher, Researcher
	Please enter the user category (Traffic Manager, Dispatcher, Researcher):



	
		Figure 14.20. Regular doctor does not often spend enough time with you or explain things so you can understand
		10.1787/888933534119
		
			null
			Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD)
		
	
	Were the displays enough for you to file flights according to the credits concept? If no, please explain.



	
		What did the Weather Forecast do to Fishermen, and what did Fishermen do to the Weather Forecast?
		
			NarveFulsås
		
		10.1080/08003830701352304
	
	
		Acta Borealia
		Acta Borealia
		0800-3831
		1503-111X
		
			24
			1
			
			
			Informa UK Limited
		
	
	How did the convective weather forecast impact your decisions?



	
		How EMR Will Impact Your CPM System
		10.1002/9781444320329.ch3
	
	
		Successfully Choosing Your EMR
		
			Wiley-Blackwell
			
			
		
	
	How did the congestion forecast impact your decisions?



	
		Please Provide a Brief Biographical Sketch
		10.2307/j.ctv4g1qz8.3
	
	
		Yellow Moving Van
		
			University of Pittsburgh Press
			null
			
		
	
	What is a high priority flight? Please provide some examples of such flights.



	
		Passenger-flight connectivity is low, with a concentration of international flights in North America and the Caribbean
		10.1787/8d08b2b5-en
		
			
			Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD)
		
	
	What is a low priority flight? Please provide some examples of such flights.



	
		Previous Question
		10.4135/9781483300498.n279
		
			
			CQ Press
		
	
	List and rate other factors not in previous question (1-5):



	
		Fig. 1. Map with sampling localities. For GPS coordonates see table 1
		10.17816/ecogen14219-27-461
		
			null
			ECO-Vector LLC
		
	
	See Fig. 8 for the table
	Your overall experience with: (See Fig. 8 for the table)



	
		What is Clear to you — is very Clear — to You!
		
			KeithAKrewson
		
		10.1177/216507997101901005
	
	
		Occupational Health Nursing
		Occupational Health Nursing
		0029-7933
		
			19
			10
			
			
			SAGE Publications
		
	
	Was the credit concept clear to you?



	
		Table 2: Responses to the question “Where did you first learn about feeding raw animal product diets for pets?”
		10.7717/peerj.3031/table-2
		
			null
			PeerJ
		
	
	By running the scenarios repeatedly, did you learn about the credit system and it's utility?



	
		First-line chemotherapy for ovarian cancer should not be given more frequently than once every three weeks
		10.3310/alert_42343
		
			
			National Institute for Health Research
		
	
	please explain
	Credit Allocation should be given: (A) All at once, at the beginning. (B) In 15-minute intervals (C) other, please explain.



	
		‘Who do you think you are?’: a critique of the concept of exceptionalism in the construction and analysis of American identity
		
			StephenWilson
		
		10.14195/978-989-26-1483-0_8
	
	
		Identity(ies)
		
			Imprensa da Universidade de Coimbra
			null
			
		
	
	Do you think the credit-based concept is feasible (applicable to current operations)?



	
		Why Your Chances Are Better Than You Think
		10.1002/9781118257951.ch4
	
	
		Was the delay outcome with credits better than baseline scenarios? 24. Would you use e-CUPS over FCFS system? Why? 25. Should market-mechanisms be used in today's operations?
		
			Wiley
			
			
		
	
	Do you think the Credit-Based concept is beneficial from your perspective? 23. Was the delay outcome with credits better than baseline scenarios? 24. Would you use e-CUPS over FCFS system? Why? 25. Should market-mechanisms be used in today's operations?



	
		References
		10.1002/9780470932117.refs
	
	
		Probabilistic Transmission System Planning
		
			John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
			
			
		
	
	Would the system work if a flight planning system automatically submitted priorities (credits) for individual flights? References



	
		Operational Concept for Collaborative Traffic Flow Management based on Field Observations
		
			HusniIdris
		
		
			RobertVivona
		
		
			StevePenny
		
		
			JimmyKrozel
		
		
			KarlBilimoria
		
		10.2514/6.2005-7434
	
	
		AIAA 5th ATIO and16th Lighter-Than-Air Sys Tech. and Balloon Systems Conferences
		Arlington, VA
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			Sep. 2005
			
		
	
	Paper No. 2005-7434
	Idris, H., Vivona, R., Penney, S., Krozel, J., and Bilimoria, K. "Operational Concept for Collaborative Traffic Flow Management based on Field Observations," AIAA 5th Aviation, Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference, Paper No. 2005-7434, Arlington, VA, 26-28 Sep. 2005.



	
		Migration of Facet from Simulation Environment to Dispatcher Decision Support System
		
			BSridhar
		
		
			KSheth
		
		
			PSmith
		
		
			WLeber
		
		10.1109/dasc.2005.1563359
	
	
		24th Digital Avionics Systems Conference
		Washington, D.C
		
			IEEE
			2005
		
	
	Sridhar, B., Sheth, K., Smith, P., and Leber, W., "Migration of FACET from Simulation Environment to Dispatcher Decision Support System," 24 th Digital Avionics Systems Conference, Washington, D.C. 2005.



	
		Congestion Management via Interactive Dynamic Flight Lists and Customer Submitted Multiple Routing Options
		
			MarkKlopfenstein
		
		
			GretchenWilmouth
		
		
			PhilipSmith
		
		
			AmySpencer
		
		
			JonMintzer
		
		
			VedSud
		
		10.2514/6.2005-7436
	
	
		AIAA 5th ATIO and16th Lighter-Than-Air Sys Tech. and Balloon Systems Conferences
		Arlington, VA
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			Sep. 2005
			
		
	
	Paper No. 2005-7436
	Klopfenstein, M. W., Wilmouth, G., Smith, P. J., Spencer, A., Mintzer, M., and Sud, V., "An Approach to Verify a Model for Translating Convective Weather Information to Air Traffic Management Impact," 5 th AIAA Aircraft Technology, Integration and Operations Conference, Paper No. 2005-7436, Arlington, VA, 26-28 Sep. 2005.



	
		Modeling and Optimization in Traffic Flow Management
		
			BSridhar
		
		
			SRGrabbe
		
		
			AMukherjee
		
		10.1109/jproc.2008.2006141
	
	
		Proceedings of the IEEE
		Proc. IEEE
		0018-9219
		1558-2256
		
			96
			12
			
			2009
			Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
		
	
	Sridhar, B., Grabbe, S., and Mukherjee, A., "Modeling and Optimization in Traffic Flow Management," Proceedings of the IEEE, Special Issue Aviation Information Systems, Vol. 96, No. 12, 2009, pp. 2060-2080.



	
		Market-Based Air Traffic Flow Control with Competing Airlines
		
			StevenLWaslander
		
		
			RobinLRaffard
		
		
			ClaireJTomlin
		
		10.2514/1.30595
	
	
		Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics
		Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics
		0731-5090
		1533-3884
		
			31
			1
			
			Jan. 2008
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA)
		
	
	Waslander, S. L., Raffard, R. L., and Tomlin, C. J., "Market-based air traffic flow control with competing airlines," AIAA Journal of Guidance, Dynamics and Control, Vol. 31, No. 1, Jan. 2008, pp. 148-161.



	
		Collaborative Decision Making in Air Traffic Management: Current and Future Research Directions
		
			MichaelOBall
		
		
			Chien-YuChen
		
		
			RobertHoffman
		
		
			ThomasVossen
		
		10.1007/978-3-662-04632-6_2
	
	
		New Concepts and Methods in Air Traffic Management
		
			LBianco
		
		
			PDell'olmo
		
		
			AROdoni
		
		Berlin, Germany
		
			Springer Berlin Heidelberg
			2001
			
		
	
	Ball, M. O., Chen, C. Y., Hoffman, R., and Vossen T., "Collaborative decision making in air traffic management: Current and future research directions," New Concepts and Methods in Air Traffic Management, edited by L. Bianco, P. Dell'Olmo, and A. R. Odoni, Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2001.



	
		Matchings in connection with ground delay program planning
		
			MichaelBall
		
		
			GeirDahl
		
		
			ThomasVossen
		
		10.1002/net.20272
	
	
		Networks
		Networks
		0028-3045
		
			53
			3
			
			May 2009
			Wiley
		
	
	Ball, M., Dahl, Geir, and Vossen, T., "Matchings in connections with ground delay program planning." Networks, Vol. 53, Issue 3, Wiley-Interscience, May 2009.



	
		Airline and Service Provider Collaborative Algorithms for Flight Route and Delay Decisions
		
			JeffHenderson
		
		
			HusniIdris
		
		
			RafalKicinger
		
		
			JimmyKrozel
		
		
			DanyiWang
		
		
			KapilSheth
		
		10.2514/6.2009-6255
	
	
		AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference
		Chicago, IL
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			Aug. 2009
		
	
	Henderson, J., Idris, H., Kicinger, R., Krozel, J., and Sheth, K., "Airline and Service Provider Collaborative Algorithm for Flight Route and Delay Decisions," AIAA Guidance, Navigation and Control Conference, Chicago, IL, Aug. 2009.



	
		Incorporating User Preferences in Collaborative Traffic Flow Management
		
			KapilSheth
		
		
			SebastianGutierrez-Nolasco
		
		10.2514/6.2008-7398
	
	
		AIAA Guidance, Navigation and Control Conference and Exhibit
		Honolulu, HI
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			Aug. 18-21, 2008
		
	
	Sheth, K. and Gutierrez-Nolasco, S., "Incorporating User Preferences in Collaborative Traffic Flow Management," AIAA Guidance, Navigation and Control Conference, Honolulu, HI, Aug. 18-21, 2008.



	
		Enhancing Collaboration in Air Traffic Flow Management
		
			KapilSheth
		
		
			SebastianGutierrez-Nolasco
		
		10.2514/6.2009-7128
	
	
		9th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference (ATIO)
		Hilton Head, SC
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			Sep. 22-24, 2009
		
	
	Sheth, K. and Gutierrez-Nolasco, S., "Enhancing Collaboration in Air Traffic Flow Management," AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration and Operations Conference, Hilton Head, SC, Sep. 22-24, 2009.



	
		FACET: Future ATM Concepts Evaluation Tool
		
			KarlDBilimoria
		
		
			BanavarSridhar
		
		
			ShonRGrabbe
		
		
			GanoBChatterji
		
		
			KapilSSheth
		
		10.2514/atcq.9.1.1
	
	
		Air Traffic Control Quarterly
		Air Traffic Control Quarterly
		1064-3818
		2472-5757
		
			9
			1
			
			2001
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA)
		
	
	Bilimoria, K. D., Sridhar, B., Chatterji, G., Sheth, K. S., and Grabbe, S., "FACET: Future ATM Concepts Evaluation Tool," Air Traffic Control Quarterly, Vol. 9, No. 1, 2001, pp. 1-20.



	
		A Rapid-Prototyping Environment for En Route Air Traffic Management Research
		
			PKMenon
		
		
			GeraldDiaz
		
		
			SSVaddi
		
		
			ShonGrabbe
		
		10.2514/6.2005-6046
	
	
		AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference and Exhibit
		San Francisco, CA; Cambridge, MA
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			Aug. 2005. Mar. 1999
		
	
	Enhanced Traffic Management System (ETMS) Functional Description
	Menon, P. K., Diaz, G., Vaddi. S., and Grabbe, S., "A rapid-prototyping environment for en route air traffic management research." AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference, San Francisco, CA, Aug. 2005. 13 Volpe National Transportation Systems Center, "Enhanced Traffic Management System (ETMS) Functional Description," U.S. Dept. of Transportation, Cambridge, MA, Mar. 1999.



	
		A. Sen On Economic Inequality. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1973, IX p. 118, p., £ 2.10.
		
			ASen
		
		10.1017/s0770451800030566
	
	
		Recherches économiques de Louvain
		Rech. écon. Louvain (Imprimé)
		0770-4518
		1782-1495
		
			42
			1
			
			1973
			CAIRN
			Oxford, England
		
	
	Sen, A., On Economic Inequality, Oxford, England, Clarendon Press, 1973.


				
			
		
	
