
	
	
		
IntroductionOne of the primary constraints on the capacity of the nation's air transportation system is the landing capacity of its largest airports.Capacity will continue to be constrained at many of these large, hub airports during some periods of the day, even in Visual Meteorological Conditions, VMC.The problem is exacerbated when the weather goes below VMC, requiring a large increase in the minimum allowable spacing between parallel runways for simultaneous use in Instrument Meteorological Conditions, IMC.New runways with the required lateral spacing are the best solution, but these are not easily implemented for a number of reasons, not the least of which are cost and community acceptance.Possible solutions are 1) to improve navigation accuracy and reduce Total System Error, TSE, to allow simultaneous operations to runways with reduced lateral separation, and 2) to move smaller commuter aircraft off the primary runways to allow more passengers per landing on the primary runways by simultaneously serving Runway Independent Aircraft, RIA, on new, shorter runways through STOL operations, or tilt-rotors and helicopters at verti-ports.The present requirement for simultaneous independent landings in IMC is at least 4300 feet of lateral runway spacing (as close as 3000 feet for runways with a Precision Runway Monitor).Operations in VMC only require a lateral runway spacing greater than 750 feet.With the advanced navigation and data-link communication systems imminent in the National Airspace System, all aircraft should know, almost instantaneously, the location and state of all other equipped traffic in the area.The Global Positioning System, GPS, with suitable local augmentation has demonstrated a lateral accuracy of only a few meters.In addition, new algorithms for predicting wake vortex movement may allow avoidance of this hazard.If traffic position and velocity information can be conveyed to the pilot (and controller) on a suitable display in real time, there should be no reason why parallel approach separation in IMC could not be similar to that presently used for VMC.The shorter runway lengths required for Runway Independent Aircraft operations, combined with reduced runway spacing due to better navigation and displays, could be combined to further increase the number of available landing areas.Not only would this use of new airspace management and flight deck technology support increased airspace system capacity, but runway expansion projects could become smaller, less expensive, and less intrusive on the environment.NASA 1-2 has sponsored Cockpit Display of Traffic Information, CDTI, studies for the en-route and terminal phases which provide intent and prediction information on the Navigation Display.These displays have included spacing tools to provide greater efficiency in sequencing aircraft into the final approach queue.NASA Langley 3-6   and NASA Ames 7 have sponsored the development of the Airborne Information for Lateral Spacing, AILS, system.The goal of this work was to enable Closely Spaced Parallel Approaches, CSPA, to runways spaced as close as 2500 feet using specific AILS cautions and alerts.The FAA has sponsored studies at Stanford University 8 using synthetic vision displays of traffic with similar approach speeds for CSPA using intent information based on traffic aircraft state information.The Mitre Corporation 9-10 studied simultaneous Category I instrument operations to the San Francisco Airport for aircraft with similar approach speeds where the primary instrument runways are spaced 750 feet.Presently, airport capacity at the San Francisco airport is reduced from about 60 arrivals per hour in visual
II. ConceptThe most challenging situation for instrument condition CSPA is to runways separated by 750 feet, the minimum used for visual traffic.Runways 28L & 28R at San Francisco International Airport, SFO, were chosen as an example for study as they meet this requirement and suffer a serious traffic acceptance penalty in instrument conditions.Figure 1 shows the airport diagram at SFO and Fig. 2 shows one example of the Cockpit Display of Traffic and Wake Information, CDTWI, on the NAV display for two heavy conventional (B747) class aircraft developed during this study for a typical proposed CSPA.Ownship is the filled icon approaching runway 28L and the paired Traffic is the open icon approaching runway 28R.Five two second position predictor circles and the wakes are shown for each aircraft.A 15 kt right quartering crosswind is shown in the upper left of the display which causes the wakes to drift to the left.Figure 3 shows another example of a typical approach for a heavy conventional on a straight in to runway 28R with a heavy RIA on a downwind approach for 28L.It was assumed that the wake of a heavy RIA could be hazardous for a heavy conventional.A short turn-in and rollout onto final at 500 feet altitude (about 1.5NM for a three degree approach) was used by the RIA to minimize the exposure to traffic and wakes.The RIA is at 140 knots on downwind and decelerates to 70 knots at rollout for the three degree final approach.The three degree glide slope capture from the 1500 foot level downwind is shown approximately abeam the runway threshold.The downwind leg abeam distance (one NM for this example) was chosen to give a small roll angle (approximately 5 degrees) at the 70 kt rollout onto final such that a go-around to the left can still be easily accomplished.The CTOL is on a three degree final from 1500 feet at 140 knots.The CTOL is shown in amber in Fig. 3, as his lateral deviation is more than one dot (120 feet at this point in the approach) to the left of the desired path.More details on the displays will be given later.The paths flown by the two aircraft and the procedures used are: 1. En-route and terminal area traffic control pair the two aircraft, Ownship and Traffic, as they enter the terminal area and space them such that at some point in the approach, the separation and wake avoidance responsibility will be turned over to the Ownship.2. Terminal control calculates (with backwards integration) an airspeed profile for both aircraft for a prescribed lateral path and a prescribed altitude profile using predicted winds, wake characteristics, and nominal approach airspeeds.Figure 4 shows an example of these profiles for the two aircraft.Ownship is at 140 kt equivalent airspeed, Ve, on the downwind and decelerates at one kt/sec to rollout on final at 70 kt.The traffic aircraft is at 240 kts and decelerates at one kt/sec to capture the glide slope at 140 kts.For this example, both aircraft captured the three degree glide slope at 1500 feet.3. The respective lateral paths and the altitude and airspeed profiles are then data-linked to the two aircraft.A profile of separation distance on the Traffic aircraft is also data-linked to Ownship.This is obtained from the distance profiles for the two aircraft from the backwards integration in step 2 which are shown in Fig. 5. Distance to Glide-Slope Intercept, GSI, is the distance to the point where the nominal glide-slope intercepts the runway surface.Figure 6 shows the nominal difference in distance from the profiles shown in Fig. 5.For aircraft with different approach speeds this profile is not a constant distance.4. The lead, or Traffic aircraft, accepts his clearance and follows the altitude and airspeed profile as data-linked.5. Ownship accepts his clearance and assumes separation responsibility on the Traffic aircraft.6. Ownship uses the data-linked lateral and vertical profile to generate pursuit display information 21 on the PFD for lateral and vertical separation.Figure 7 shows an example of Ownship's PFD.The PFD was patterned after conventional CTOL PFDs with the exception of the flight path centered symbology in the central area of the display.A flight path marker (white with large open center) is used in conjunction with the leader (green perspective delta winged aircraft with small circular tailpipe) for pursuit guidance.The leader is flying a perfect trajectory T seconds ahead of Ownship.The pilot's task is to place the flight path marker on the This compensates for errors in the predicted wind, Traffic aircraft speed errors, and errors in the datalinked profiles, and provides the desired wake separation.The algorithm used for commanded speed was: ) where DS ACTUAL is the separation distance based on actual Traffic location with respect to Ownship and DS NOMINAL is the up-linked value in Ownship's clearance (Fig. 6).t D is the approximate convergence time constant for distance errors.A value of 60 seconds was used.8.Both Ownship and Traffic use their NAV display to monitor separation and wakes.This procedure helps eliminate the dispersion tails on lateral separation and also supports wake avoidance by the crew if necessary.V C = V NOMINAL - 1 t D DS ACTUAL -DS NOMINAL ( )(1As can be seen, there are two critical problems in solving the CSPA problem in instrument conditions, traffic separation and wake avoidance.Typical traffic profiles flown have been shown in Figs. 2 and3.A brief description of the vehicle simulated will be given next followed by a discussion of traffic separation and then details on wake avoidance.
III. Vehicle SimulatedAn existing simulation of a Civil Tilt Rotor 21 was used as the simulated vehicle.It was a vehicle with a 50,000 pound gross weight, 250KT cruise speed, and the capability of tilting the thrust vector (rotors) through 90 degrees.The CTOL Traffic aircraft was simulated with the thrust vector at zero degrees (aligned with respect to the fuselage) which gave conventional aircraft flight characteristics.The RIA Ownships were simulated with the thrust vector at 80 degrees from the fuselage centerline giving powered lift aircraft flight characteristics.For the calculation of wake characteristics discussed later, it was assumed the heavy conventional aircraft had a 200 ft wingspan and approach weight of 450,000 pounds.The heavy RIA was assumed to have a 100 ft wingspan and an approach weight of 100,000 pounds.The CTOL Traffic trajectories were flown first on the simulation and then stored.During the simulated RIA Ownship flights, the stored Traffic flights were then used to simulate the Traffic.The stored Traffic flights had small intentional path and speed deviations.The control system used was Rate Command/Attitude Hold in the pitch and roll axes with yaw turn coordination.
IV. Lateral Traffic SeparationRecommendations from the FAA's Advisory Circular AC120-29A 20 addressing Category I and II weather minima for approach, and Advisory Circular AC120-28D 19 addressing Category III weather minima for takeoff, landing, and approach, were used to construct bounds on lateral and vertical error.These documents specify RNP Levels for various phases of approach, Initial, Intermediate, and Final.The concept of RNP specifies the performance of the system to maintain the aircraft within a defined boundary 95% of the time.This 95% value is defined by the FAA to be 1xRNP.A value of 2xRNP is termed the containment limit.The errors were displayed to the pilot as deflections of the lateral deviation indicator (LDI) and vertical deviation indicator (VDI).The LDI and VDI are shown on the PFD of Fig. 7 as the magenta diamonds on the bottom and right edges of the PFD.The PFD LDI/VDI scaling used was 1xRNP corresponding to one-dot, and 2xRNP "containment" corresponding to two-dots.The 1xRNP values are shown in Fig. 8. RNP values used at 100 ft altitude and below were 0.003 NM (18 ft) laterally and 15 ft vertically.FAA Advisory Circular AC120-29A suggests that these values support Category I/II/III minima.Based on experience with this display format in the civil tilt rotor simulation reported by the author 21 , values for RNP for the initial approach segment of the profile were selected to be 0.02 NM (120 ft) laterally and 100 ft vertically.These values are tighter than the AC120-29A Initial/Baro-Vertical approach RNP Levels.These values were held constant above 667 feet.Between 100 ft and 667 ft the RNP values were proportional to altitude.From Fig. 8, the value of lateral 1xRNP on the Closely Spaced Parallel Approach is 0.015NM (90 feet) at the 500 ft altitude rollout point.If we assume 3xRNP containment for each aircraft and a 750 ft runway separation, there are 210 feet left over for the sum of wing semi-spans (approximately the B747 wingspan).For Gaussian distribution, 3xRNP gives a probability of being more than 270 feet towards the other runway for each aircraft of about 2 x10 -9 .The joint probability of both aircraft being off laterally towards the other runway more than 270 feet at the same distance from touchdown (GSI) and at the same time is much less than 10 -9 .With a good display of traffic information and rigid two pilot cockpit procedures, manually controlled errors should have shorter dispersion tails than Gaussian distributions.With this level of confidence in cross-track protection, it is believed that specific blunder protection algorithms to provide protection from the other aircraft may not be necessary.
V. Wake Prediction AlgorithmsThe wake prediction algorithms of Reference 15, predicted winds, and aircraft characteristics were used for predicting wake position.These wake predictions were used by traffic control for generating the up-linked clearance trajectories and also in real time for the NAV display wake depiction.They are shown on the NAV display for two example scenarios in Figs. 2 and3.If the center of gravity, c.g., of the Ownship (apex of the solid triangle) in Fig. 2, for example, is kept out of the wake area for the Traffic, then Ownship has a high probability of not encountering any hazardous wake-vortex-induced rolling moments.From Ref. 15, if the wing span, b f , of the following aircraft is less than 0.5 the wingspan, b g , of the lead or generating aircraft, the initial width of the lead's hazardous wake area is twice its wingspan.If b f / b g ≥ 0.5, the initial wake width, B g , of the generating aircraft is:B g = 2 + b f / b g -0.5 ( ) [ ] b g (2)Since both heavy CTOL aircraft in Fig. 2 were assumed to have wingspans of 200 feet, the initial width of both wakes is 500 feet.The aircraft icon wingspan was kept proportional to the actual wingspans, but was constant for all map scales.At the 0.25NM range scale of Fig. 2 the icon wingspan is twice that of the actual aircraft or 400 feet.For large times behind the wake generating aircraft, the wake expands as:B g = 0.5b g t (3)where t is time in seconds behind the generating aircraft.For the example of Fig. 2, the time-dependent wake characteristic is smaller than the initial constant width characteristic for t £ 25 seconds.In addition, the lateral spread of both wake segments is increased by an amount equal to the ability to predict the wind, and this accounts for the slight spread in the wakes seen in the Fig. 2. A value of two knots was assumed for the uncertainty in wind prediction for two aircraft on Closely Spaced Parallel Approaches.Once the upper boundary of the hazardous area of the wake of the generating aircraft has drifted down below the following aircraft, the wake was no longer shown on the NAV display.Vertical spread of the wake was predicted 15 similar to the lateral and its sink rate, w , was calculated 16 using:w = W 2prV • ¢ b 2 (4)where W is the aircraft weight, r is air density, V • is free-stream airspeed, and ¢ b is the effective vortex span.
VI. Approach Scenarios
A. Traffic Spacing with Different Approach SpeedsOnce a means for the prediction of the wake locations is assumed, algorithms for optimal along-track spacing for achieving maximum dual runway airport acceptance rates for a mix of light RIA, heavy RIA, and conventional aircraft can be determined.Figure 9 shows the geometry for a typical scenario at the start of the CSPA where the Ownship's separation on the Traffic aircraft's wake on base turn first goes below the minimum lateral runway separation allowable for unrestricted operation.The current value 22 of 2500 feet was used.S MS is the distance to the initial point (start of the CSPA) for this minimum separation for Ownship (distance measured from GSI).The Traffic aircraft is assumed to first encounter the point for minimum separation on Ownship's wake at the same distance, S MS , as shown in Fig. 9. Figure 10 conceptually shows the distance to GSI time histories for two pair of aircraft on Closely Spaced Parallel Approaches.Each pair has a high speed Traffic (CTOL) and a lower speed Ownship (RIA).The abscissa is time (increasing to the right) with the difference in GSI arrival times, Dt GSI , and the difference in times, Dt MS , for first going below the allowable lateral runway separation needed for unrestricted operation at distanceS MS shown.Since distance is measured from the GSI, the slopes (velocities) in Fig. 10 are negative for approach.Each aircraft in the following pair must have enough time separation from either aircraft in the preceding pair for their wakes to dissipate.This separation time, t d (minimum of 2-3 minutes 15 ), is shown at a typical distance in Fig. 10.For the scenario shown, the Traffic aircraft passes Ownship on the final approach.It can be seen that the following Ownship aircraft has minimum time separation on the preceding Traffic at S MS and the following Traffic has minimum time separation on the preceding Ownship at GSI.From Fig. 10 it can also be seen that for a given value of t d , the time interval between successive Traffics to runway 28R or successive Ownships to runway 28L is the larger of t d + Dt GSI or t d + Dt MS .From either pair of aircraft in Fig. 10:Dt GSI + Dt MS = t MS ( ) O -t MS ( ) T (5)where t MS ( ) O,T are the times for Ownship, Traffic to travel from the initial wake minimum separation point, S MS , to GSI.From the geometry in Fig. 10, the minimum extra separation time, t E , over the time for wake dissipation, t d , for aircraft pairs with different speeds occurs when Dt GSI = Dt MS = t E .This of course gives the maximum airport acceptance rates.From Eq. ( 5) then, the minimum extra time between pairs of aircraft with different approach speeds is:t E = t MS ( ) O -t MS ( ) T 2(6)which becomes zero for aircraft with the same approach speeds (or times).This does require that the faster aircraft pass the slower on final approach.For a typical no-wind example of Traffic at 140 knots and Ownship at 70 knots and a distance, S MS , of 12964 feet (for a 3000 foot base turn radius), t E = 27.4 seconds.For this example and a typical minimum time, t d , for wake dissipation of two minutes, gives an acceptance rate for two runways of 48.
Right Cross-WindFor a very strong right cross-wind, or for complete Ownship wake protection, if both aircraft arrive at the GSI at the same time (Dt GS = 0 in Fig. 10) the Traffic aircraft in each pair will always be behind its paired Ownship.This gives the Ownship complete wake protection, and Ownship's wake is not a factor for Traffic because of the right crosswind.Figure 11 shows the NAV display for an example of this scenario with a 10KT right crosswind component.From Fig. 10, this doubles the time penalty, t E , between paired aircraft and reduces the two runway acceptance rate to 41.2 per hour.To help alleviate this penalty, we can let the Traffic pass on final such that Ownship is following Traffic at GSI.For a right crosswind, the Traffic's wake will drift toward Ownship with the critical point being as Ownship approaches the GSI with the Traffic ahead on the rollout.It is assumed that the Traffic's wake is no longer generated after touchdown and Ownship must therefore be close enough to the Traffic such that Traffic's wake at touchdown (GSI) doesn't drift onto Ownship as it approaches GSI.The trajectory clearances that are up-linked to both aircraft predict the wake drift and space the aircraft appropriately.To determine, for this case, the maximum time that Ownship can safely follow the Traffic at GSI, a worst case was assumed with both Traffic and Ownship 2xRNP (36 feet each from Fig. 8) lateral error towards each other approaching GSI.For a 10 KT right crosswind, zero headwind, and a 2 KT wind measurement error allowance example, the maximum time, Dt GS , a RIA Ownship can follow the heavy CTOL Traffic without encountering the Traffic's hazardous wake area is 21.9 seconds.This is less than the 27.4 seconds for equal Dt GSI and Dt MS from the earlier light crosswind example and from Eq. ( 5), t E = 32.9 and the two runway acceptance rate reduces to 47.1 per hour.This is a small penalty over the 48.8 per hour for light crosswinds.Figure 12 shows the NAV display for this example, and it can be seen that Ownship's c.g. is well clear of the Traffic's hazardous wake area.It was assumed that Ownship has the present local winds, the Traffic's size, weight, and position history such that Traffic's wake location can be predicted in real time using the algorithms given earlier.This allows the Ownship to monitor the Traffic wake to accommodate any unforecast deviations in winds or flight paths from those predicted.
Left Cross-WindFor a very strong left cross-wind, or for complete Traffic wake protection, if both aircraft arrive at the distance, S MS , for the start of the CSPA at the same time (Dt MS = 0 in Fig. 10) the Ownship aircraft in each pair will always be behind its paired Traffic.This gives Traffic complete wake protection and Traffic's wake is not To help alleviate this penalty, we can let the Traffic pass on final such that Traffic is following Ownship at the initiation of the CSPA.For a left crosswind, Ownship's wake will drift toward Traffic with the critical point being when Traffic approaches the distance where Ownship starts final, S F , as for larger Ownship distances (as seen in Fig. 9), the lateral distance for the wake to drift is greater.This would not be true for large crosswinds but is an acceptable assumption for reasonable crosswinds.Traffic must therefore be close enough to the Ownship such that Ownship's wake doesn't drift onto Traffic as Traffic approaches S F .The up-linked trajectory clearances predict the wake drift and space the aircraft appropriately.To determine, for this case, the maximum time that Traffic can safely follow Ownship at S F , a worst case was assumed with both Traffic and Ownship 2xRNP (180 feet each from Fig. 8 for a 500 foot altitude) lateral error towards each other.For a 10 KT left crosswind, zero headwind, and a 2 KT wind measurement error allowance example, the maximum time, Dt F , a heavy CTOL Traffic can follow a heavy RIA Ownship at the start of Ownship's final without encountering Ownship's hazardous wake area is 10.6 seconds.The start of a final from 500 feet altitude and for a three degree glide-slope is a distance, S F , of 9541 feet.For the no headwind example with Dt F = 10.6 seconds, this gives a time, Dt MS , of 25.0 seconds at S MS = 12964 feet.This is less than 27.4 seconds for equal Dt GSI and Dt MS for the light crosswind example and from Eq. ( 5), t E = 29.8 , and the two runway acceptance rate goes to 48.1 per hour.Again, this is a small penalty over the 48.8 per hour for light cross-winds.Figure 13 shows the NAV display for this example and it can be seen that Traffic's c.g. is well clear of Ownship's hazardous wake area.It was assumed that Traffic has the present local winds, Ownship size, weight, and position history such that Ownship's wake location can be predicted in real time using the algorithms given earlier.This allows the Traffic to monitor the Ownship wake to accommodate any unforecast deviations in winds or flight paths from those predicted.
Summary for Different Approach SpeedsFor aircraft with different approach speeds and the approach scenarios considered so far for the development of the spacing algorithms, the results are summarized in Fig. 14.Again the examples considered had zero headwind, 70KT RIA final approach speed, 140KT CTOL final approach speed, 120 second wake dissipation time, 2KT wind measurement uncertainty, and the CTOL Traffic was allowed to pass the RIA Ownship on final.For varying winds and varying approach speeds, the distance profiles from the backward integration (Fig. 5) need to be used for determining the predicted allowable separation times but the procedure is similar.An example for the nominal right crosswind spacing scenario is shown in Fig. 15.The results show that even when there is a factor of two difference in approach speeds (and times on approach), a large percentage of the VMC airport acceptance rate for identical approach speeds can be recovered in IMC conditions.Although not shown in Fig. 14, for the strong crosswind cases discussed earlier with complete wake protection (no passing on final) the airport acceptance rate is 41.2 aircraft per hour.This is almost 70% of the VMC rate and is a significant improvement over the present day 50% IMC rate.As mentioned earlier, for equal approach speeds there is no airport acceptance rate penalty in IMC conditions.
B. Additional Nominal Approach ScenariosIn addition to the approach scenarios discussed previously, two additional nominal scenarios were examined.Light RIA/Heavy Conventional and Two Heavy Conventionals.These are discussed next.
Light RIA / Heavy ConventionalFigure 16 shows the NAV display for this scenario.The light STOL RIA is on a six degree approach with the heavy conventional on a three degree approach.It was assumed that the wake of the light RIA has a negligible effect on the heavy conventional.If the light RIA is kept ahead of the heavy conventional (both assumed to land at the same time in Fig. 16) and is above the heavy conventional wake, there is wake protection for the light RIA.Since both aircraft have wake protection and can touch down at the same time, there is no time penalty on the presently used VMC airport acceptance rate.
Two Heavy ConventionalsFigure 2 shows the NAV display for this scenario.Both heavy conventionals are on a three degree approach.The Ownship conventional aircraft approaching runway 28L maintains a distance profile equivalent to a constant time interval (five seconds was used) on the conventional aircraft Traffic approaching runway 28R.This procedure is very similar to the present VMC procedure and therefore has no airport acceptance rate penalty.
C. Approach Scenarios with AbusesFour Heavy RIA / Heavy Conventional abuse case scenarios were also flown: Right Crosswind with Error, Head Wind Error, Traffic Fast, and Traffic 0.5 NM Initial Position Error.These are discussed next.
Heavy RIA / Heavy Conventional -Right Crosswind with +5 KT ErrorFor the scenario shown in Fig. 12, "Heavy RIA Approaching GSI after Being Overtaken by a Heavy Conventional on Final with a 10KT Cross-Wind Component", the actual wind was the same 10KT as used in predicting the longitudinal spacing.If the actual crosswind component is significantly larger and the spacing is not adjusted, then Ownship may have a conflict with the Traffic wake approaching GSI.Figs.17-19 show the NAV display for this case where the crosswind component was 5KT (15KT total) greater than that used in calculating the longitudinal spacing.Figure 17 shows the Traffic aircraft about to pass Ownship at about 0.8NM on final.Traffic's large wake drift angle can be seen and alerts Ownship that he may have to abandon the approach.Figure 18 shows the situation with Ownship at 0.2NM on final and Traffic on the rollout.The Traffic wake color has changed to amber as the c.g. of Ownship is less than 100 feet from the hazardous wake area and Ownship should consider a go-around.When Ownship's c.g. entered the Traffic wake, it turned red. Figure 19 shows Ownship on a goaround.Since no specific go-around guidance was provided for this phase of the study, Ownship's icon has turned red in color to indicate that he is more than 2xRNP off his desired approach path.
Heavy RIA / Heavy Conventional -Head Wind Error, Traffic Fast Error, and Traffic Initial Position ErrorA -5KT headwind error, Traffic fast +10Kt, and Traffic 0.5 NM initial position error on downwind abuses were also examined.No lateral position or wake problems were encountered for any of these abuses and after correcting for the Traffic's initial position error, only minor longitudinal spacing errors were experienced.
VII. Performance SummariesThree NASA Research pilots with extensive experience in both heavy fixed wing and powered lift vehicles including helicopters and tilt rotors evaluated five of the Heavy RIA/Heavy Conventional approach scenarios with differing approach speeds in order to obtain a representative set of performance data.The nominal left crosswind, the nominal right crosswind, unpredicted head wind error, Heavy Conventional Traffic flies faster than cleared, and the Traffic aircraft having a 0.5NM initial position error scenarios were flown for data.The remaining scenarios were demonstrated to all three pilots for comments but were not included in the data shown below.In addition to the head winds and crosswinds in the various scenarios flown, turbulence (2.5 fps RMS) was simulated for all scenarios.
A. Lateral ErrorsFigure 20 shows the lateral Flight Technical Error, FTE, for these five scenarios and the three pilots.The allowable 1xRNP TSE (one dot from Fig. 8) and the actual FTE are shown.For reference, the mean and the absolute value of the mean + two times the standard deviation are also shown.From Ref. 20, the difference between the desired flight path and the actual flight path, TSE, is the sum of the path definition error, navigation system error, and FTE (including any display error).FTE is the accuracy with which the aircraft is controlled as measured by the indicated aircraft position on the display with respect to the indicated command.The path definition and display errors were assumed to be zero for this system.Moralez, et al. 23 , has shown, in flight, that with GPS navigation and a suitable Local Area Augmentation System, LAAS, the navigation system error is small compared to the FTE.His means and standard deviations of the lateral and vertical navigation system errors were less than one foot.The along track values were on the order of five feet.Navigation system errors were not simulated for the present study and it was assumed that FTE was a good approximation to TSE.It can be seen from Fig. 20 that the FTE is significantly less than that required.The only significant deviation from the desired path occurred at the base turn initiation where, because of a fairly abrupt turn entry, the pilots tended to overshoot to the outside of the turn slightly with a mean of about 40 feet.Especially on final where lateral separation for the CSPA is important, the FTE cross-track error at roll out onto final is less than 30 feet, and reducing to about 10 feet approaching minimums.The calculation of FTE (performance error less than this value 95% of the time) is a little cumbersome.A sorting routine was developed and used for the data shown.Some approximations to FTE using standard statistical measures were tried, and a reasonable approximation for the data analyzed was found to be the absolute value of the mean + two times the standard deviation as shown in Fig. 20.
B. Vertical ErrorsFigure 21 shows the vertical FTE for these five scenarios and the three pilots.The allowable 1xRNP TSE (one dot from Fig. 8) and the actual FTE are shown.Again it can be seen that the FTE is well below the 1 dot required value.On the downwind and base segments, FTE is about 30 feet, and on final approaching minimums it is about 10 feet
C. Longitudinal ErrorsFigure 22 shows the longitudinal distance FTE for these five scenarios and the three pilots.No allowable 1xRNP TSE was specified.The FTE is shown.Since the initial 0.5NM position error abuse scenario for the Traffic was included in these data, the FTE is close to the 0.5NM initial position error at the start of the downwind portion of the flights.This initial position error was nulled out by the base turn and it can be seen that the FTE is about 500 feet rolling out on final and stabilized at about 250 feet on final.While this was acceptable performance, it is felt that it can be improved.Figure 23 shows the airspeed FTE for these five scenarios and the three pilots.It can be seen that during the base turn and rolling out on final, large deviations in the actual airspeed from that commanded by Eq. ( 1) are evident.Since the commanded airspeed from Eq. ( 1) only includes distance error, it is felt that the addition of wind prediction errors and Traffic aircraft airspeed errors to Eq. ( 1) may improve airspeed performance and decrease the distance errors.
VIII. Pilot RatingsFigure 24 shows a summary of the pilot ratings for the five scenarios and the three pilots.The Cooper-Harper Pilot Rating Scale 24 for handling qualities was used.A pilot rating of 3.5 is the boundary between satisfactory and adequate.Satisfactory lateral and vertical performance was specified as less than one dot deviation (Fig. 8).No numeric value was specified for satisfactory longitudinal performance.As long as the traffic and wake situation on the NAV display were acceptable, the pilots considered their performance satisfactory.For the approach scenarios used for data, the closest approach to traffic was 644 feet and the closest approach to a wake was 21 feet.From Fig. 24, the lateral and longitudinal handling characteristics on the downwind and the longitudinal characteristics on final were generally satisfactory with the others being borderline satisfactory/adequate.The pilots generally felt the base turn entry was too abrupt and that the flight director was a little active.They also felt that while the NAV display gave good situational information, the workload in tracking the desired flight path using the PFD didn't allow them time to adequately monitor the NAV display.As mechanized for this simulation, they felt it would definitely be a two pilot task.The level of monitoring required was similar to that required for manually flown Cat IIIA approaches.
IX. ConclusionsThe results of this preliminary study showed that the proposed concept for CSPA under instrument conditions is feasible.Further simulation and eventually flight verification are warranted.1.The study showed that maintaining lateral traffic separation within the proposed RNP limits was possible and a fairly easy task for the pilot to accomplish.The actual lateral FTE value on final, where exposure to other traffic occurs, was on the order of 10 feet.It was shown that an allowable value of 90 feet provided lateral traffic protection much better than 10 -9 .It is felt that with this level of protection, specific blunder prediction mechanisms may not be needed.2. The longitudinal spacing concepts developed provided protection from wakes.For aircraft with different approach speeds, a small penalty in airport acceptance rates compared to present VMC operation was necessary.If larger penalties in airport acceptance rates for these aircraft are acceptable (or for initial operation), almost complete wake protection can be provided.For a mix of light STOL and heavy conventional aircraft and for aircraft with the same approach speeds, no penalty in airport acceptance rates during IMC is necessary compared to present VMC operation while still having almost complete wake protection.3. The display of traffic and wakes on the NAV display provided good situational information.This allowed the flight crew to monitor the traffic and wake situation for unforecast changes in the wind, traffic airspeed errors, and any errors in the data linked profiles.It also allowed the lateral dispersion errors to be monitored to minimize any lateral dispersions.4. The lateral and vertical FTE values at decision height (50 feet) were consistent with that required for CAT IIIA 19 . 5. The pilots generally felt the concept and proposed system had potential for acceptance and safe implementation.With the implementation used for this simulation, it was felt to be a two pilot task to both control to the desired path and to simultaneously monitor the traffic and wake situation on the NAV display.
X. RecommendationsSeveral areas needing further work are suggested.1. Continue the wake prediction work of Refs.14-15.The algorithms in this work were developed for conventional aircraft and need to be extended to powered lift vehicles and helicopters.More flight verification is also needed.2. Examine the trade-off in airport acceptance rates versus wake protection.For aircraft with different approach speeds, a penalty in airport acceptance rates is necessary.Larger wake protection margins can be provided at the expense of reduced airport acceptance rates.3. Examine and specify along-track 1xRNP limits that provide a good compromise on required performance and airport acceptance rates.4. Examine decelerating final approaches for the slower STOL aircraft.Equations ( 5) and (6) show that the penalty in airport acceptance rates is a function of the difference in times from the point of initial wake concern to touchdown.If the STOL aircraft can decrease his time on final by decelerating to the final STOL approach speed near minimums, the penalty in airport acceptance rates will be reduced.5. Implement the display of traffic and wake on the Primary Flight Display to give the pilot flying additional traffic and wake awareness.Also incorporate into the PFD additional along track performance limits and situational information.6. Integrate this CSPA spacing tool into the terminal area arrival control process and examine the impact of goarounds and incorporate them into the terminal area control process.7. Perform flight verification of the system.Figure 1 .1Figure 1.San Francisco International Figure 2. Typical CDTWI for the Approach of Two Airport Diagram Conventional (B747) Aircraft to Runways 28L/28R at SFO
Figure 3 .Figure 4 .34Figure 3. Profile Used for a CSPA of a B747 Class Aircraft on a Straight-in and a Heavy RIA on a Downwind Approach
Figure 7 .7Figure 5. Nominal Distance Profiles From the Figure 6.Nominal Distance Between Traffic Backwards Integration and Ownship
Figure 8 .8Figure 8. One-Dot (1xRNP) Values
8 aircraft8per hour versus 60 per hour for aircraft with equal speeds on two runways or 30 per hour for single runway IMC operation.Again for this example from Fig.10, Ownship is 27.4 seconds ahead of Traffic at the initial wake minimum separation point, S MS , and 27.4 seconds behind at GSI.If a significant crosswind is present, this could allow Ownship's wake to drift onto Traffic at the initial wake minimum separation point or the Traffic wake to drift onto Ownship at GSI.For these cases, different procedures are required and these are discussed next.
Figure 9 .9Figure 9. Ownship First Encounters the 2500 Foot Figure 10.Spacing for Traffic Pairs Minimum Runway Separation on Traffic
Figure 11 .Figure 12 .1112Figure 11.Heavy RIA/Heavy Conventional Approaching Touchdown with Complete Wake Protection for a Right Crosswind
Figure 13 .13Figure 13.Heavy RIA/Conventional at Start of CSPA with a 10 KT Left Crosswind
Figure 14 .Figure 15 .1415Figure 14.Example Airport Acceptance Rates for Aircraft with Different Approach Speeds
Figure 17 .17Figure 17.Heavy RIA/Conventional Approaching with a 15 KT (versus 10 KT Predicted) Right Crosswind -0.8 NM on Final
Figure 21 .21Figure 20.Lateral Errors
Figure 24 .24Figure 22.Longitudinal Distance Errors Figure 23.Airspeed Errors
		
		
			

				


	
		A Cockpit Display Designed to Enable Limited Flight Deck Separation Responsibility
		
			WalterWJohnson
		
		
			VernolBattiste
		
		
			SheilaHollandBochow
		
		10.4271/1999-01-5567
	
	
		SAE Technical Paper Series
		Anaheim, CA
		
			SAE International
			1999
		
	
	Johnson, W.W. and Battiste,V., "A Cockpit Display Designed to Enable Limited Flight Deck Separation Responsibility," Proceedings of the 1999 World Aviation Conference, Anaheim, CA, 1999.



	
		Enabling strategic flight deck route re-planning within a modified ATC environment - The display of 4D intent information on a CSD
		
			VernolBattiste
		
		
			WalterJohnson
		
		
			SheilaBochow
		
		10.2514/6.2000-5574
	
	
		2000 World Aviation Conference
		Anaheim, CA
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			2000
		
	
	Battiste,V. and Johnson, W.W., "Enabling Strategic Flight Deck Re-Planning Within A Modified ATC Environment: The Display of 4-D Intent Information on a CSD," Proceedings of the 2000 World Aviation Conference, Anaheim, CA, 2000.



	
		The Flight Deck Perspective on the NASA Langley AILS Concept
		
			LRRine
		
		
			TSAbbott
		
		
			GWLohr
		
		NASA/TM-2000-209841
		
			January 2000
		
	
	Rine, L. R., Abbott, T. S., and Lohr, G. W., "The Flight Deck Perspective on the NASA Langley AILS Concept," NASA/TM-2000-209841, January 2000.



	
		NASA research for instrument approaches to closely spaced parallel runways
		
			DawnElliott
		
		
			RBPerry
		
		10.2514/6.2000-4358
		AIAA-2000-4358
	
	
		AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference and Exhibit
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			2000
		
	
	Elliot, D. M. and Perry, R. B., "NASA Research for Instrument Approaches to Closely Spaced Parallel Runways," AIAA-2000-4358, 2000.



	
		GASPER/AILS: an integrated DGPS/ADS-B airborne alerting system for closely spaced parallel approaches
		
			PSamanant
		
		
			MJackson
		
		
			CMHaissig
		
		
			BConvin
		
		10.1109/plans.2000.838284
		NASA/CR-2000-210109
	
	
		IEEE 2000. Position Location and Navigation Symposium (Cat. No.00CH37062)
		
			IEEE
			May 2000
		
	
	Samanant, P. and Jackson, M., "Description of the AILS Alerting Algorithm," NASA/CR-2000-210109, May 2000.



	
		Flight Test Evaluation of the Airborne Information for Lateral Spacing (AILS) Concept
		
			TSAbbott
		
		NASA/TM-2002-211639
		
			April 2002
		
	
	Abbott, T. S., "Flight Test Evaluation of the Airborne Information for Lateral Spacing (AILS) Concept," NASA/TM-2002-211639, April 2002.



	
		Airborne and ground information for lateral spacing during closely spaced parallel approach operations
		
			VBattiste
		
		
			SHolland-Bochow
		
		
			NHJohnson
		
		10.1109/dasc.2002.1052972
		DASC 2100
	
	
		Proceedings. The 21st Digital Avionics Systems Conference
		The 21st Digital Avionics Systems Conference
		
			IEEE
			null
			2100
		
	
	Battiste,V., Holland-Bochow, S., and Johnson, N. H., "Airborne and Ground Information for Lateral Spacing during Closely Spaced Parallel Approach Operations," DASC 2100, 2100.



	
		Flight demonstration of 3D perspective synthetic vision and ADS-B for closely spaced parallel approaches
		
			CJennings
		
		
			MCharafeddine
		
		
			JDPowell
		
		
			STaamallah
		
		10.1109/dasc.2002.1052977
	
	
		Proceedings. The 21st Digital Avionics Systems Conference
		The 21st Digital Avionics Systems Conference
		
			IEEE
			2002a, 2002
		
	
	Jennings, C., Charafeddine, M., and Powell, J. D., "Flight Demonstration of 3D Perspective Synthetic Vision and ADS-B for Closely Spaced Parallel Approaches," DASC 2002a, 2002.



	
		Study of the geometry of a dependent approach procedure to closely spaced parallel runways
		
			JHammer
		
		10.1109/dasc.1999.863731
	
	
		Gateway to the New Millennium. 18th Digital Avionics Systems Conference. Proceedings (Cat. No.99CH37033)
		
			IEEE
			1999. March 1999
		
	
	Hammer, J., "Study of the Geometry of a Dependent Approach Procedure to Closely Spaced Parallel Runways," 1999 IEEE, March 1999.



	
		Paired approach operational concept
		
			RBone
		
		
			AMundra
		
		
			BOOlmos
		
		10.1109/dasc.2001.963404
	
	
		20th DASC. 20th Digital Avionics Systems Conference (Cat. No.01CH37219)
		
			IEEE
			2001. January 2001
		
	
	Bone, R., Mundra, A., and Olmos, B. O., "Paired Approach Operational Concept," 2001 IEEE, January 2001.



	
		Potential Future Contribution of Air Traffic Management Technology to the Capacity of San Francisco International Airport
		
			WBCotton
		
	
	
		Prepared for San Francisco International Airport
		
			San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development Commission
			August 2001
		
	
	Cotton, W. B., "Potential Future Contribution of Air Traffic Management Technology to the Capacity of San Francisco International Airport," Prepared for San Francisco International Airport, San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development Commission, August 2001.



	
		Development of a wake vortex spacing system for airport capacity enhancement and delay reduction
		
			DAHinton
		
		
			CJO'connor
		
		10.1109/dasc.2000.886943
	
	
		19th DASC. 19th Digital Avionics Systems Conference. Proceedings (Cat. No.00CH37126)
		Philadelphia, PA
		
			IEEE
			October 2000
		
	
	Paper 3E6, 19th Digital Avionics Systems Conference
	Hinton, D. A. and O'Conner, C. J., "Development of a Wake Vortex Spacing System for Airport Capacity Enhancement and Delay Reduction," Paper 3E6, 19th Digital Avionics Systems Conference, Philadelphia, PA, October 2000.



	
		Progress Towards the Investigation of Technical Issues Relevant to the Design of an Aircraft Wake Vortex Advisory System (WakeVAS)
		
			DavidKRutishauser
		
		
			GLohr
		
		
			DHamilton
		
		
			RPowers
		
		
			BMckissick
		
		
			CAdams
		
		
			ENorris
		
		10.2514/6.2003-3808
		NASA/TM-2003-212176
	
	
		21st AIAA Applied Aerodynamics Conference
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			April 2003
		
	
	Rutishauser, D. K., Lohr, G., Hamilton, D., Powers, R., Mckissick, B., Adams, C., and Norris, E., "Wake Vortex Advisory System (WakeVAS) Concept of Operations," NASA/TM-2003-212176, April 2003.



	
		Reduction of Uncertainties in Prediction of Wake-Vortex Locations
		
			VernonJRossow
		
		10.2514/2.2996
	
	
		Journal of Aircraft
		Journal of Aircraft
		0021-8669
		1533-3868
		
			39
			4
			
			July-Aug 2002
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA)
		
	
	Rossow, V. J., "Reduction of Uncertainties in Prediction of Wake-Vortex Locations", AIAA Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 39, No 4, July-Aug 2002, pp. 587-596.



	
		Use of Individual Flight Corridors to Avoid Vortex Wakes
		
			VernonJRossow
		
		10.2514/2.3091
	
	
		Journal of Aircraft
		Journal of Aircraft
		0021-8669
		1533-3868
		
			40
			2
			
			Mar./Apr. 2003
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA)
		
	
	Rossow, V. J., "Use of Individual Flight Corridors to Avoid Vortex Wakes", AIAA Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 40, No. 2, Mar./Apr. 2003, pp. 225-231.



	
		Roadmap for Performance -Based Navigation, Evolution for Area Navigation (RNAV) and Required Navigation Performance (RNP) Capabilities 2003-2020, Version 1.0
		
			WLHolforty
		
		
			JDPowell
		
		8260.51
	
	
		Paper 154, 20th DASC Conference
		Daytona Beach, FL
		
			October 2001. July 2003. December 2002. July 13. 1999. August 2002
			17
		
	
	Criteria for Approval of Category I and Category II Weather Minima for Approach. FAA AC 120-29A
	Holforty, W. L. and Powell, J. D., "Flight Deck Display of Airborne Traffic Wake Vortices," Paper 154, 20th DASC Conference, Daytona Beach, FL, October 2001. 17 "Roadmap for Performance -Based Navigation, Evolution for Area Navigation (RNAV) and Required Navigation Performance (RNP) Capabilities 2003-2020, Version 1.0," FAA, July 2003. 18 "United States Standard for Required Navigation Approach Procedure Construction, Order 8260.51," FAA, December 2002. 19 "Criteria for Approval of Category III Weather Minima for Takeoff, Landing, and Rollout," FAA AC 120- 28D, July 13, 1999. 20 " Criteria for Approval of Category I and Category II Weather Minima for Approach," FAA AC 120-29A, August 2002.



	
		Pursuit Display Review and Extension to a Civil Tilt Rotor Flight Director
		
			GordonHHardy
		
		10.2514/6.2002-4925
		7110.65P, Para. 5-5-4
	
	
		AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference and Exhibit
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			August 2002. February 19, 2004
			22
		
	
	FAA Order
	Air Traffic Control
	Hardy, G.H., "Pursuit Display Review and Extension to a Civil Tilt Rotor Flight Director," AIAA 2002-4925, August 2002. 22 "Air Traffic Control," FAA Order 7110.65P, Para. 5-5-4, February 19, 2004.



	
		In-Flight Assessment of a Pursuit Guidance Display Format for Manually Flown Precision Instrument Approaches
		
			IiiMoralez
		
		
			ETucker
		
		
			GEHindson
		
		
			WSHardy
		
		
			GH
		
	
	
		Proceedings of the American Helicopter Society 60th Annual Forum
		the American Helicopter Society 60th Annual ForumBaltimore, Maryland
		
			June 2004
		
	
	"Moralez III, E., Tucker, G. E., Hindson, W. S., and Hardy, G. H., "In-Flight Assessment of a Pursuit Guidance Display Format for Manually Flown Precision Instrument Approaches," Proceedings of the American Helicopter Society 60th Annual Forum, Baltimore, Maryland, June 2004.



	
		The Use of Pilot Rating in the Evaluation of Aircraft Handling Qualities
		
			GECooper
		
		
			RPHarper
		
		NASA/TN D-5153
		
			1969
		
	
	Cooper, G. E. and Harper, R. P., "The Use of Pilot Rating in the Evaluation of Aircraft Handling Qualities," NASA/TN D-5153, 1969.


				
			
		
	
