
	
	
		
Nomenclature i= aircraft index R P min (i) = statistical minimum of path distance, nmi V TAS max (i) = statistical maximum of average true airspeed, knots S R (i) = minimum required leading/trailing wake vortex spacing, nmi R P (i) = path distance, nmi S new (i) = new leading/trailing wake vortex spacing, nmi S E (i) = excess spacing at runway threshold, nmi S B (i)= spacing buffer, nmi
S(i)= observed leading/trailing wake vortex spacing at runway threshold, nmi !T D (i) = delay time saved, sec !R P (i) = path distance saved, nmi T entry (i) = TRACON entry time, Unix time T runway (i) = runway threshold crossing time, Unix time T D (i) = estimated delay time, sec !T P (i) = delay savings due to path compression, sec !T S (i) = delay savings due speed compression, sec
I. Introductionrecent comprehensive study of aircraft arrivals at several of the busiest airports in the United States showed excess leading/trailing aircraft wake vortex spacing. 1 This excess spacing is an inefficiency in the terminal area that causes increased delay and fuel consumption and it degrades throughput.Due to the projection that air traffic is expected to grow 90% over the next twenty years as measured by revenue passenger miles, 2 this growth will certainly lead to more airport arrival operations that will amplify this excess spacing inefficiency.The Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen) is our Nation's solution for safely and efficiently handling this substantial increase in air traffic demand relative to current day operations. 3NextGen technologies are expected to reduce this excess spacing; therefore, reducing delay, fuel consumption and increasing throughput.Two approaches to assess the effectiveness of NextGen technologies are human-in-the-loop (HITL) simulations and statistical models.HITL simulations require supporting infrastructure (laboratory), participants, and a sufficient financial budget.Additionally, HITL simulations take significant time to organize and execute; however, they sometimes are the credible way to validate a new technology.In contrast, some assessments are more appropriately studied by statistical models.The technical tradeoff is the operational realism offered by a HITL simulation versus the faster, broader assessments enabled by statistical models.These two approaches can complement each other.For example, if a statistical model of a NextGen technology shows some potential benefits, the next step may be to access it with a HITL simulation.Data from HITL simulations can also be used to improve the statistical models.][6] Delay and throughput benefits have been determined based upon those results, which are specific to an airport, airport configuration, fleet mix, etc.Recently, two studies that make use of the statistical modeling approach have quantified the potential benefits from certain NextGen technologies such as precision scheduling, sequencing, and spacing and continuous descent operations (CDO). 1,7Both of these comprehensive studies made use of the same very large dataset of recorded traffic from 2010 (approximately 500,000 arrival flights).In Ref. 7, Robinson and Kamgarpour showed that the potential fuel savings from CDO during congested arrival periods is highly variable -day-to-day, aircraft to aircraft, etc.In Ref. 1, Zelinski analyzed the observed excess in-trail spacing for aircraft operating in instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) and visual meteorological conditions (VMC) to 29 runways in eight of the busiest Terminal Radar Approach Control Facilities (TRACONs).Zelinski assessed two major benefits of precision scheduling and spacing: (1) potential throughput increases and (2) potential flight time savings.The potential increase in throughput was determined using a separation buffer of 0.3 nmi.Performance-based navigation (PBN) such as Area Navigation (RNAV)/Required Navigation (RNP) 8 routes were modeled for each runway to assess delay savings.Flights were re-sequenced according to their new arrival times along these routes using the same speed profiles flown along the original routes.The delay savings for flights operating in VMC and IMC were estimated based on these original and new arrival times.The resource intensive procedure of trajectory reconstruction and subsequent examination to determine suitable RNAV routes was a key requirement of Zelinski's precision scheduling and spacing analysis. 9No alternative statistical method for assessing the potential benefits of precision scheduling and spacing automation tools on excess spacing can be found in the literature.In this study, we offer a statistical modeling method, like those discussed in Ref. 1 and Ref. 7., for assessing the potential benefits of terminal scheduling and spacing automation tools that does not require all of the complexities associated with HITL simulations.Moreover, the method presented in this paper does not require the complexity of reconstructing/generating trajectories to determine suitable RNAV routes.Our model estimates delay reduction when excess spacing is recovered by shortening each aircraft's path and (optionally) increasing its speed closer to its shortest and fastest reasonable limits, respectively.We refer to each model used to shorten the path and (optionally) increase the speed as the "traffic compression" model or "compression" model for short.This study is motivated by a desire to estimate flight time in the terminal area due to excess spacing at the runway threshold given a large arrival traffic sample (>1,000 flights) without requiring resource intensive trajectory reconstruction and examination procedures of each aircraft's route flown from the meter fix to the runway threshold.The study described in this paper quantifies potential delay savings, but is not motivated by a specific technology (e.g., RNP).NextGen technologies, however, are expected to result in more efficient terminal area operations-realizing at least some of the potential savings.Our statistical model can be viewed as a first order analysis that estimates delay savings due to reduced excess spacing.This work differs from Ref. 1 in four key ways.First, it does not require establishing RNAV/RNP routes through reconstruction of each aircraft's trajectory.In fact, the methodology used in this analysis uses trajectory states at just two key discrete points along the aircraft's arrival trajectory: entry into the TRACON and at the runway threshold.Second, the impact of speed variations, in addition to path variations, is explored.Third, the flights are segregated by meteorological condition before delay savings is estimated, whereas Ref This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.segregates the results after delay savings is estimated.Fourth, the minimum separation requirement of 2.5 nmi is used instead of 3 nmi. 10,11he methodology and traffic compression models used for the analyses are discussed in detail in Section II.Section III presents the results of the delay savings analysis.Lastly, we outline our conclusions regarding the statistical traffic compression model described in this paper in Section IV.
II. MethodologyThis analysis uses the recorded tracks of approximately 500,000 flights in eight different TRACONs.These flights occurred during January through May 2010.Figure 1 depicts a top-level flow diagram of the generation of the input data used in the compression models.The mathematical notation used in the last two blocks in the flow diagram are defined in the nomenclature section and will be described in detail later.The procedure begins with the recorded flight plans and tracks of the Center/TRACON Automation System (CTAS). 12A bundled set of post-processing scripts called Terminal Utilities performs various functions and calculations such as data integrity checks, required runway threshold separation, runway assignments, and determines various speeds and distances (e.g.ground, air, etc.).These calculations are described in more detail in Ref. 7. However, aircraft delay is not determined via the recorded radar tracks and subsequent Terminal Utilities post-processing because of prohibitively long execution times.In this paper, we estimate the aircraft delay as part of the compression models.It is not necessary that this delay estimate be precise because we are interested only in delay savings (i.e.relative delay values and not absolute).Now, following the execution of the Terminal Utilities, a database of numerous aircraft parameters is generated.Included in this database are the X and Y coordinates of the aircraft.For the purpose this analysis, a 40 nmi radius from the applicable runway threshold defines the notional TRACON boundary.Figure 2 shows the TRACON entry and runway threshold coordinates for aircraft landing at KATL 27L.The compression models make use of a subset of aircraft parameters captured upon entry into the TRACON and at the runway threshold (facilitated by the Terminal Utilities data processing-with the exception of meteorological conditions) and is listed in Table 1.The entry and runway subscribes correspond to parameters captured at the TRACON entry and runway threshold, respectively.The required spacing, S R , is a function of the leading and trailing aircraft weight classes (commonly referred to as "3/4/5 spacing" to denote the required minimum separation in nmi). 13The observed spacing, S , is the distance between the leading and trailing aircraft when the leading aircraft crosses the runway threshold.Path distance is the observed horizontal distance that the aircraft traverses.Ground distance is the estimated distance traveled by integrating the aircraft's observed ground speed with respect to time.Air distance is the estimated distance traveled by integrating the aircraft's estimated true airspeed (also with respect to time).Thus, the ground and air distances would be the same if there were no winds.Crossing times are captured at the TRACON entry, T entry , and runway threshold, T runway , in addition to the distances.Key flight attributes such as the aircraft identification (ID), arrival route (i.e., Standard Terminal Arrival Route (STAR)), and engine type (jet, turboprop, and piston) for each flight are also recorded.Airport meteorological conditions are retrieved from the FAA's Aviation System Performance Metrics (ASPM) quarter-hourly reports 14 and then fused into Table 1.The analysis uses the inputs provided in Table 1 to derive a reference delay time, T D (i) for each aircraft, i .This time establishes a reference time to facilitate relative delay savings calculations resulting from compressing the arrival traffic.The path distance flown for each aircraft, i , is calculated beginning with the first flight recorded on the first day of recordings ( i =1) and ending with the last flight recorded on the last day of recordings, R P (i) = P runway (i) !P entry (i).(1) This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.The air and ground distances are, respectively,R A (i) = A runway (i) ! A entry (i)(2)andR G (i) = G runway (i) ! G entry (i).(3)The transit time isT (i) = T runway (i) ! T entry (i).(4)The average true airspeed is determined using the air distance and transit time,V TAS (i) = R A (i) / T (i)(5)whereas the average ground speed uses of the ground distance and transit time,V GS (i) = R G (i) / T (i).(6)The average headwind for each aircraft is estimated as the difference between these average speeds:V W (i) ! V GS (i) "V TAS (i).(7)Arrival flights, for all days, are grouped by engine type, STAR, runway, and meteorological condition.This segregation results in a distribution of path distance, Eq. ( 1), and average true airspeed, Eq. ( 5) for each unique engine type/STAR/runway/meteorological condition grouping.Those aircraft that flew faster than the median are in a percentile greater than the 50 th , but less than the 100 th .Similarly, those aircraft that flew shorter distances than the median are in a percentile less than the 50 th , but greater than the 0 th .The strategic selection of a path distance and true airspeed percentile enables a delay time to be calculated.The extremes in the path distance and true airspeed distributions are avoided by limiting the minimum and maximum percentiles to the 10 th percentile (path) and 90 th percentile (speed).These outliers are included in the compression models, but do not receive any benefits.Hereafter, the minimum path distance that corresponds to a certain percentile is referred to as R P min (k) and the maximum (average) true airspeed that corresponds to a certain percentile is referred to as V TAS max (k) .The index k denotes that there are k unique engine type/STAR/runway/meteorological condition combinations.The minimum path distance for each aircraft, R P min (i), and maximum average true airspeed, V max TAS (i), correspond to the appropriate R P min (k) and V TAS max (k), respectively.The compression model does not allow path distances to increase.For those aircraft that have shorter than the statistically calculated minimum path distances (like the outliers mentioned above), the original path distance is used (i.e., if R P min (i) > R P (i) ), then R P min (i) = R P (i) ).A similar check on V max TAS (i) is not performed.Now, a new ground speed for each aircraft is determined from the maximum true airspeed and average winds,V GS new (i) = V TAS max (i) +V W (i).(8)The ratio of the minimum path distance and this new ground speed establishes a minimum transit time,T min (i) = R P min (i) / V GS new (i).Finally, the reference delay time for each arriving flight is established as the observed transit time less the minimum transit time,T D (i) = T (i) ! T min (i).(10)Delay time for each aircraft, T D (i) , in conjunction with the observed spacing, S from Table 1, establish a reference for comparison and are hereafter referred to as the baseline.Two types of traffic compression models are used to quantify the potential reduction of excess spacing at the runway threshold and the corresponding delay savings.The first model is referred to as the path compression model because the flight's path distance can be reduced, but its observed average true airspeed is retained.The second model is referred to as the path and speed compression model because the flight's path distance can be reduced and its average true airspeed can be increased in order to recover additional excess spacing.Both traffic compression models result in new path distances flown, S new (for comparison with S ), and new reference delay times, T D new (for comparison with T D (i) provided in Eq. ( 10).The path compression model is described first, followed by the path and speed compression model.
A. Path Compression ModelThe path compression model determines the excess spacing,S E (i) = S(i) ! S T (i),(11)which is the difference between the observed spacing and the target spacing, given below,S T (i) = S R (i) + S B (i),(12)where S R is the required in-trail separation, and S B is a spacing buffer.The spacing buffer is modeled as a normal random number with mean, µ , and standard deviation, ! ,S B (i) ~!(µ,! ).()13The mean spacing buffer is set to 0.5 nmi.Its standard deviation is prescribed as half of the mean (! = 0.25 nmi) based on the reasoning described in Ref. 1 indicating that 95% separation conformance is achieved within a buffer size at least twice that of the standard deviation.Eq. ( 13) models the in-trail spacing variations observed in actual operations.For each day of recorded aircraft traffic, Eqs.(14-16) determine the amount of path compression, the new path distance flown and the new excess spacing, respectively,!R P (i) = R P (i) " R new,P (i),(14)R new,P (i) = max R P min (i), R P (i) ! max(S E (i), 0) { } if i = 1 max R P min (i), R P (i) ! max(S E (i) + "R P (i !1), 0) { } if i > 1, # $ % & % (15) S E new (i) = S E (i) ! "R P (i) if i = 1 S E (i) ! ("R P (i) ! "R P (i !1)) if i > 1. # $ % & %(16)The minimum value for !R P (i) is zero occurring when R P min (i) = R P (i) .The new transit time after path compression is determined from the new path distance and original average ground speed T new,P (i) = R new,P (i) / V GS (i).This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.
The new runway threshold crossing time isT runway new,P (i) = T runway (i) !"T P (i),where !T P (i) = T (i) " T new,P (i).()19The new spacing and new delay time follow, respectively,S new (i) = S R (i) + S E new (i),(20)T D new (i) = T D (i) ! "T P (i).(21)The delay savings resulting from path compression and excess spacing reduction is found using the baseline delay provided in Eq. (10) and the new delay time from Eq. ( 21),!T D (i) = T D (i) " T D new (i). (22)Because the metric of interest is a time change, Eq. ( 22) is equivalent to Eq. ( 19).That is, the reduced delay is naturally the reduced transit time.The new excess spacing calculated using Eq. ( 16) is never negative, ensuring that the original arrival sequence is preserved.
B. Path and Speed CompressionThe path and speed compression model is an extension of the path compression model.The new transit time given in Eq. (17) above comes from flying a shorter path than the originally observed route while maintaining the same original average ground speed.Modeling speed changes in addition to route changes is another compression strategy described next.Here, the minimum transit time is calculated using the new path distance, Eq. (15), and new average ground speed, Eq. ( 8),T * min (i) = R new,P (i) / V GS new (i).(23)Next, the two components of the time change are determined.The first component is the difference from the values found in Eq. ( 17) and Eq. ( 23),!T 1 (i) = T new,P (i) " T * min (i).()24The second component is the ratio of the new excess spacing (given in Eq. ( 16)) to the new ground speed,!T 2 (i) = S E new (i) / V GS new (i). (25)Estimating the time change as T runway new,S (i) = T runway new,P (i) !"T S (i), This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.!T S (i) = min(!T 1 (i), !T 2 (i)),(26)T new,S (i) = T runway new,S (i) !T entry (i),T D new,S (i) = T D (i) !(T runway (i) !T runway new,S (i)).(29)Finally, the delay savings due to path and speed compression and excess spacing reduction is!T D (i) = T D (i) " T D new,S (i).(30)Algebraic manipulations (see Appendix) of Eqs. ( 18), ( 27), (29), and (30), reveal a more insightful expression for Eq. ( 30) showing that the delay savings is a linear combination of the delay savings of the path compression model, Eq. ( 19), and the speed compression model, Eq. ( 26),!T D (i) = !T P (i) + !T S (i).(31)
C. ScopeResults are shown for two busy runways in the United States.The two runways selected, KATL 27L and KDEN 35R, are chosen because they are independent runways dedicated to arrivals only.Zelinski identified several runway procedural constraints that could affect in-trail spacing in Ref. 1; the two runways chosen here are free from those constraints.Three types of results are shown: The sensitivity of the results to the compression model, the daily variation of the estimated delay savings and excess spacing reduction, and the excess spacing statistical distributions before and after path compression.Sensitivity analyses are performed on the R P min and V TAS max threshold percentiles in order to understand how they affect the estimated delay savings.As a reminder, these percentiles determine the reasonable "minimum" observed path distance and "maximum" average true airspeed, respectively.These percentiles are calculated on a per runway/STAR/engine type/meteorological condition basis.For the path compression model, the delay savings, Eq.(19), is unaffected by V TAS max , so two threshold percentiles are chosen for R P min to understand the range of !T D .The chosen lower bound is the 50 th percentile while the chosen upper bound is the 10 th percentile.The path and speed compression model uses these same two R P min threshold percentiles in combination with two V TAS max threshold percentiles (50 th and 90 th , the lower and upper limits of the true airspeed distribution, respectively).This results in a total of two discrete values of !T D for the path compression model and four discrete values for the path and speed compression model.The notation 10 R P min indicates the minimum path distance value, R P min , was assigned to the 10% percentile path distance value.Similar notation is used for the maximum average true airspeed, V TAS max .The two discrete values of !T D for the path compression model correspond to 50 R P min and 10 R P min .The four discrete values of !T D for the path and speed compression model correspond to (1) 50 R P min , 50 V TAS max , (2) 50 R P min , 90 V TAS max , (3) 10 R P min , 50 V TAS max , and (4) 10 R P min , 90 V TAS max .This same notation will be retained in the results section below.Now, varying the percentile that defines the statistical minimum, R P min , also affects the path distance saved, !R P , given in Eq. ( 14)and will be shown in the results section.Following the minimum path distance and maximum average true airspeed sensitivity analyses, the daily variations of delay savings, !T D , and excess spacing reduction, !R P , are examined for KATL 27L.The statistical minimum path distance is fixed at the 10 th threshold percentile ( 10 R P min ).Only results for the path compression model are presented.Lastly, cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) are used to compare the baseline (i.e., observed) in-trail spacing and the in-trail spacing resulting from the path compression model for the 2.5 nmi required minimum separation.The analysis compares the percentage of flights with excess in-trail spacing of 0.5 nmi or less.In these analyses, the delay time savings and path distance savings are provided in terms of the statistical median rather than the mean in order to lessen the affect of outliers in the data.The number of outliers is small (a fraction of a percent) and are the typical of data consistency errors encountered when analyzing large real air traffic data sets.).With this definition, a significant number of aircraft were not allowed to lengthen their path, which would have resulted in negative delay savings.Although the average delay savings was not zero, this paper references the median as the statistical metric.Flying shorter than average routes in the terminal area, 10 R P min , reducing the excess spacing, compresses the arrival traffic and saves almost 30 seconds per flight for KATL 27L (Fig. 3) and nearly 60 seconds for KDEN 35R (Fig. 4) during VMC periods.During IMC periods, about 40 seconds are saved for KATL 27L (Fig. 3) and about 108 seconds for KDEN 35R (Fig. 4).The path and speed compression model achieves the most delay savings at the lower and upper bounds on the minimum path distance and maximum true airspeed percentiles, respectively ( 10 R P min , 90 V TAS max ).In these circumstances, aircraft are flying faster on shorter routes (faster and shorter than the actual route/speeds flown).This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.
III. ResultsA couple of trends can be observed in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4. First, there is greater delay savings during IMC periods than VMC periods, and greater savings at KDEN 35R than KATL 27L.These results are consistent with more excess in-trail spacing during IMC periods and at KDEN 35R.Second, there is greater sensitivity to the R P min threshold percentile than the V TAS max threshold percentile.These results indicate that there is more variability in the path distances flown than the true airspeeds.This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.Figure 5 shows the effect of varying the "minimum" path distance threshold percentile on the median path distance saved, Eq. ( 14).Speed compression does not reduce the path distance flown; thus, only R P min threshold percentiles are examined.Open squares indicate the 50 th threshold percentile whereas asterisks indicate the 10 th threshold percentile.Consistent with the delay savings shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, path reductions are achieved when flying shorter than average routes, IMC reductions are greater than VMC, and are greater at KDEN 35R.In other words, there is more recoverable excess spacing in IMC than in VMC and more at KDEN 35R than KATL 27L.This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.
B. Daily Variation of Results for KATL Runway 27LThe following three figures show data from analyses at KATL 27L. Figure 6 illustrates the daily variations of the delay savings, Fig. 7, the median path distance reduction, and Fig. 8, the number of flights during VMC and IMC periods.These analyses are presented for the path compression model with a fixed threshold value of 10 R P min .The delay savings shown in Fig. 6 varies from a few seconds per aircraft to roughly 115 seconds.Similar to the findings in Ref. 7, these results suggest that the day-to-day benefit pool of increased spacing precision will be quite variable.Similarly, Fig. 7 shows the daily variation of the path distance reduction.Values range from less than 1 nmi to about 5.5 nmi.Some of this daily variation is due to a low number of arrivals in the database for a given day -for example, the VMC results for Day 30.However, the cause(s) of much of the daily variation is not readily apparent.For example, Days 2, 3, 4, 15, and 27 each have about 500 flights and are exclusively VMC.Generally, these results are consistent with the findings reported in Ref.This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.Most of the days that show no delay savings are a result of missing arrivals in the database for that day, as seen in Fig. 8.The missing flights were caused by a traffic recording malfunction that has since been resolved.Most of the days that show no delay savings are a result of missing arrivals in the database for that day, as seen in Fig. 8. Days 5, 11, 19, 21, 22, 24, and 28 did not have any tracks recorded.In addition, Days 18, 30, 31, and 32 have few VMC arrivals recorded, and Days 7, 12, 26, and 31 have few IMC arrivals recorded.Therefore, some of the results for these days can be particularly sensitive to the sample size.For example, the Day 8 IMC results and Day 30 VMC results should be considered outliers due to their low sample sizes relative to the other traffic days.The missing flights were caused by a traffic recording malfunction that has since been resolved.
C. Cumulative Distribution FunctionsA cumulative distribution function (CDF) provides the probability of a random flight arriving with a leading/following aircraft wake vortex spacing less than or equal to x , where x is the spacing value of interest.This section provides the CDFs for (1) the observed in-trail spacing, S in Table 1 (referred to as the baseline) and(2) the in-trail spacing resulting from the path compression model, S new , from Eq. ( 20). S and S new are examined for those flights that require a minimum 2.5 nmi separation from the flight immediately ahead of it; most arrivals at KATL 27L and KDEN 35R are subject to that minimum required separation.Figure 9 shows that as the in-trail spacing increases so do the likelihood of more flights achieving that spacing.Ten percent of the flights have less than the required minimum separation for the baseline (actual operations) whereas roughly 6% of the flights have less than the required minimum separation after adjustments are made with the path compression model.In these cases, the leading aircraft of the pair was compressed forward in time and more in-trail spacing was achieved.A crossover point exists at about 2.8 nmi after which the path compression model results in more arrivals with less excess spacing relative to the baseline.These results show that 20% (below crossover point) of flights are subjected to a slight increase of in-trail spacing while the remaining 80% (above crossover point) achieve a moderate reduction in excess spacing -roughly 0.25 nmi.Another suitable point of comparison is 3 nmi as this corresponds to the mean buffer of 0.5 nmi prescribed in Eq. (13).Thirty percent of flights land with a 3 nmi separation or less for the baseline whereas the path compression model increases the probability by 10% (40% of the arrivals achieving a spacing buffer of 0.5 nmi or less).Figure 10 shows the CDFs for KATL 27L for aircraft operating in IMC periods; it is similar to the VMC CDFs in Fig. 9; however, there is no crossover point.For flights during IMC periods, there is a more substantial reduction in excess spacing that can be recovered -roughly 0.5 nmi.In other words, the observed excess in-trail separation present in the operations to KATL 27L is accompanied by enough corresponding excess path distance flown to allow its recovery.The percentage of arrivals landing with excess spacing of 0.5 nmi (3 nmi spacing) or less is 10% for the baseline and 22% for the path compression model; an increase of 12%, roughly the same as the arrivals under VMC periods.However, more arrivals during IMC periods benefit (i.e., land with less excess spacing in general) as a result of the path compression than during VMC.This observation is made when comparing the area between the baseline and path compression CDFs in   Immediately apparent is the larger difference between the baseline and the path compression model relative to those shown for KATL 27L. Figure 11 (previous page) shows that ~5% of the baseline arrivals land with 3 nmi spacing (excess separation of 0.5 nmi).The path compression model achieves ~30%, a 25% increase over actual operations.Figure 12 presents the last CDF in this analysis for arrivals during IMC periods.Very few baseline arrivals, about 2%, land with excess spacing of 0.5 nmi compared to ~30% resulting from the path compression.
IV. ConclusionA statistical modeling method for accessing the potential benefits of terminal scheduling and spacing automation tools has been developed and described.The key to such a statistical model is a sufficiently large data set of recorded flights.The model is referred to as a traffic compression model because it estimates delay reduction when excess spacing is recovered by shortening each aircraft's path and (optionally) increasing its speed closer to its shortest and fastest reasonable limits, respectively.This model does not require the trajectory reconstruction/generation procedure of modeling RNAV routes.Instead, our compression models can quickly provide first order analysis of potential delay savings achieved by reducing excess leading/following aircraft wake vortex separation using aircraft parameters captured at just two discrete locations in the trajectory: TRACON entry and runway threshold crossing.Thousands of arrivals recorded over a five-month period in early 2010 enabled an analysis of observed wake vortex separation at KATL 27L and KDEN 35R (referred to as the baseline).A path compression model and its variant that models faster average airspeeds in the terminal area are utilized to examine the potential delay savings.Keys to the models are path and true airspeed distributions for aircraft flying on the same STAR to the same runway with the same engine type and operating in the same meteorological conditions.Selecting a percentile within the path and speed distribution produces two important parameters, the minimum path distance ( R P min ), and the maximum average true airspeed ( V TAS max ), respectively.Varying R P min and V TAS max results in a range of potential delay savings.From the results of the R P min and V TAS max sensitivity analysis (both path and path with speed compression models), we conclude the following:• Delay savings are more sensitive to R P min than V TAS max • More potential savings exist at KDEN 35R than KATL 27L• More potential savings in IMC than VMC This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.• At KATL 27L, median delay savings per flight varied from -5 to 33 seconds in VMC and 0 to 55 seconds in IMC • At KDEN 35R, median delay savings per flight varied from 0 to 80 seconds in VMC and 0 to 120 seconds in IMC Following the sensitivity analysis, the daily variations of delay and path savings were examined with the path compression model using 10 R P min .The reduction in excess spacing was also examined for those arrivals that required a 2.5 nmi separation using CDFs.This second half of the analysis found:• Uneven daily delay and path savings • At KATL 27L, 10% increase over the baseline in arrivals landing with an excess spacing of 0.5 nmi or less and 25% increase at KDEN 35RThis study found that potential benefits of scheduling and spacing automation tools can be estimated by a statistical traffic compression model that makes use of aircraft parameters captured at just two descrete trajectory locations.This method eliminates the need to reconstruct and examine the entire trajectory from the TRACON meter fix to the runway threshold for each aircraft.And, it can be used irrespective of how the excess leading/following aircraft wake-vortex separation is reduced.. 1 A1Downloaded by NASA AMES RESEARCH CENTER on August 14, 2013 | http://arc.aiaa.org| DOI: 10.2514/6.2013-4424
Figure 1 .1Figure 1.Compression Model Input Generation Flow Diagram.
Figure 2 .Table 1 .21Figure 2. A80 TRACON Boundary Centered From KATL 27L.
( 17 )17Downloaded by NASA AMES RESEARCH CENTER on August 14, 2013 | http://arc.aiaa.org| DOI: 10.2514/6.2013-4424
where the superscript S indicates speed compression model.This enables the calculation of a new runway threshold crossing time, new transit time and new delay time given below in Eqs.(27-29), respectively,
( 27 )27Downloaded by NASA AMES RESEARCH CENTER on August 14, 2013 | http://arc.aiaa.org| DOI: 10.2514/6.2013-4424
Downloaded by NASA AMES RESEARCH CENTER on August 14, 2013 | http://arc.aiaa.org| DOI: 10.2514/6.2013-4424Thismaterial is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.
A.Figures 3 (above) and Fig. 4 (next page) show the effect of varying the "minimum" path distance and "maximum" average true airspeed threshold percentiles on the delay savings per flight at KATL 27L and KDEN 35R, respectively.Open circles denote the delay savings, Eq. (19), corresponding to the two R P min threshold values for the path compression model.Asterisks denote the delay savings, Eq. (31), corresponding to the four combinations of R P min and V TAS max threshold percentiles for the path and speed compression model.For the path compression model, no delay savings are achieved when defining the minimum path distance as the median path distance ( 50 R P min).With this definition, a significant number of aircraft were not allowed to lengthen their path, which would have resulted in negative delay savings.Although the average delay savings was not zero, this paper
Figure 3 .3Figure 3. Median Delay Time Saved, !T D , Per Flight In VMC And IMC at KATL 27L.
Figure 4 .4Figure 4. Median Delay Time Saved, !T D Per Flight In VMC And IMC at KDEN 35R.
Figure 5 .5Figure 5. Median Path Distance Saved, !R , Per Flight In VMC And IMC.
7.
Figure 6 .6Figure 6.Median Daily Variation of Delay Time Saved at KATL 27L in IMC and VMC.
Figure 7 .7Figure 7. Median Daily Variation of Path Distance Saved at KATL 27L in IMC and VMC.
Figure 8 .8Figure 8. Daily Variation of Number of Arrivals at KATL 27L in IMC and VMC.
Figure 9 .9Figure 9. Cumulative Distribution Function, KATL 27L, VMC.
Fig 9 and9Figure10shows the CDFs for KATL 27L for aircraft operating in IMC periods; it is similar to the VMC CDFs in Fig.9; however, there is no crossover point.For flights during IMC periods, there is a more substantial reduction in excess spacing that can be recovered -roughly 0.5 nmi.In other words, the observed excess in-trail separation present in the operations to KATL 27L is accompanied by enough corresponding excess path distance flown to allow its recovery.The percentage of arrivals landing with excess spacing of 0.5 nmi (3 nmi spacing) or less is 10% for the baseline and 22% for the path compression model; an increase of 12%, roughly the same as the arrivals under VMC periods.However, more arrivals during IMC periods benefit (i.e., land with less excess spacing in general) as a result of the path compression than during VMC.This observation is made when comparing the area between the baseline and path compression CDFs in Fig 9 and Fig 10.Now, after examining the CDFs for the 2.5 nmi reduced separation on final at KATL 27L, the CDFs for aircraft landing at KDEN 35R in VMC and IMC, are shown in Fig. 11 and Fig. 12, respectively.
Figure 10 .10Figure 10.Cumulative Distribution Function, KATL 27L, IMC.
Figure 11 .11Figure 11.Cumulative Distribution Function, KDEN 35R, VMC.
Figure 12 .12Figure 12.Cumulative Distribution Function, KDEN 35R, IMC.
			This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.
			(9) Downloaded by NASA AMES RESEARCH CENTER on August 14, 2013 | http://arc.aiaa.org| DOI: 10.2514/6.2013-4424Thismaterial is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.
			Downloaded by NASA AMES RESEARCH CENTER on August 14, 2013 | http://arc.aiaa.org| DOI: 10.2514/6.2013-4424Thismaterial is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.
		
		
			
AppendixSubstituting Eq. (18) into Eq.( 27) yieldsNow, substitute Eq. (A1) into Eq.( 29),T D new,S (i) = T D (i) !"T P (i) !"T S (i).(A2)Finally, substituting Eq. (A2) into Eq.(30),produces the expression given in Eq. (31).			
			

				


	
		Benefits of precision scheduling and spacing for arrival operations
		
			SZelinski
		
		10.1109/dasc.2012.6382979
		
	
	
		2012 IEEE/AIAA 31st Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC)
		Williamsburg, Virginia
		
			IEEE
			October 14-18, 2012. 1 November 2012. June 2007
			2
		
	
	Concept of Operations for the Next Generation Air Transportation System. Version 2.0
	Zelinski, S., "Benefits of Precision Scheduling and Spacing for Arrival Operations," 31 st Digital Avionics Systems Conference, Williamsburg, Virginia, October 14-18, 2012. 2 Federal Aviation Administration, Aerospace Forecast Fiscal Years 2012-2032 URL: www.faa.gov/about/office_org/headquarters_offices/apl/aviation_forecasts/aerospace_forecasts/2012-2032 [cited 1 November 2012]. 3 Joint Planning and Development Office, "Concept of Operations for the Next Generation Air Transportation System," Version 2.0, June 2007.



	
		Design Considerations for a New Terminal Area Arrival Scheduler
		
			JaneThipphavong
		
		
			DanielMulfinger
		
		
			AlexanderSadovsky
		
		10.2514/6.2010-9290
	
	
		10th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations (ATIO) Conference
		Ft. Worth, Texas
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			September 13-15, 2012
		
	
	Thipphavong, J., Mulfinger, D., "Design Considerations for a New Terminal Area Arrival Scheduler," 10 th AIAA Aviation Technology Integration and Operations Conference, Ft. Worth, Texas, September 13-15, 2012.



	
		Design and Evaluation of the Terminal Precision Scheduling and Spacing System
		
			HNSwenson
		
		
			June 14-17, 2011
			Berlin, Germany
		
		
			USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar
		
	
	Swenson, H. N., et al., "Design and Evaluation of the Terminal Precision Scheduling and Spacing System," 9 th USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar, Berlin, Germany, June 14-17, 2011.



	
		Controller-managed spacing within mixed-equipage arrival operations involving flight-deck interval management
		
			JThipphavong
		
		10.1201/b12321-14
	
	
		Advances in Human Aspects of Aviation
		Chicago, Illinois
		
			CRC Press
			June 10-13, 2013
			
		
	
	10 th USA/
	Thipphavong, J., et al., "Evaluation of the Controller-Managed Spacing Tools, Flight-deck Interval Management and Terminal Area Metering Capabilities for the ATM Technology Demonstration #1," 10 th USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar, Chicago, Illinois, June 10-13, 2013.



	
		Benefits of Continuous Descent Operations in High-Density Terminal Airspace Considering Scheduling Constraints
		
			JohnRobinson Iii
		
		
			MaryamKamgarpour
		
		10.2514/6.2010-9115
	
	
		10th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations (ATIO) Conference
		Fort Worth, Texas
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			September 13-15, 2010
		
	
	Robinson III, J. E. and Kamgarpour, M., "Benefits of Continuous Descent Operations in High-Density Terminal Airspace Under Scheduling Constraints," 10 th AIAA Aviation Technology Integration and Operations Conference, Fort Worth, Texas, September 13-15, 2010.



	
		The impact of advanced technology on Nex Generation Air Transportation: A case study of Required Navigation Performance (RNP)
		
			YoonjinYoon
		
		
			MarkHansen
		
		10.2514/6.2007-6697
	
	
		AIAA Modeling and Simulation Technologies Conference and Exhibit
		Hilton Head, South Carolina
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			August 20-23, 2007
		
	
	AIAA-2007-6697
	Yoon, Y. and Hansen, M., "The Impact of Advanced Technology on Next Generation Air Transportation: A Case Study of Required Navigation Performance (RNP)," AIAA-2007-6697, AIAA Modeling and Simulation Technologies Conference and Exhibit, Hilton Head, South Carolina, August 20-23, 2007.



	
		A graph-based approach to nominal terminal routing
		
			SZelinski
		
		10.1109/dasc.2012.6382333
		
	
	
		2012 IEEE/AIAA 31st Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC)
		Williamsburg, Virginia
		
			IEEE
			October 14-18, 2012. February 25. 2013. 1 February 2013
			10
		
	
	Federal Aviation Administration. Order A80 7110.65E CHG2
	Zelinski, S., "A Graph-Based Approach to Defining Nominal Terminal Routing," 31 st Digital Avionics Systems Conference, Williamsburg, Virginia, October 14-18, 2012. 10 Federal Aviation Administration, "Standard Operating Procedures", Order A80 7110.65E CHG2, February 25, 2013 URL: http://www.faa.gov [cited 1 February 2013].



	
		Standard Operating Procedures (SOP)
		10.1002/9780471462422.eoct523
	
	
		Control Positions of Operation and Standard Operating Procedures (SOP)
		
			John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
			
		
	
	Order D01
	11 Federal Aviation Administration, "Control Positions of Operation and Standard Operating Procedures (SOP)", Order D01



	
		
		
			H
		
		
		
			April 12. 2012. 1 February 2013
		
	
	1H, April 12, 2012 URL: http://www.faa.gov [cited 1 February 2013].



	
		Design and Operational Evaluation of the Traffic Management Advisor at the Fort Worth Air Route Traffic Control Center
		
			HNSwenson
		
		JO 7110.65U CHG 2
		
	
	
		Europe Air Traffic Management Research & Development Seminar
		
			June 16-19, 1997. March 7. 2013. 1 February 2013
			Sarclay, France
		
	
	Air Traffic Organization Control
	12 Swenson, H. N., et al., "Design and Operational Evaluation of the Traffic Management Advisor at the Fort Worth Air Route Traffic Control Center," 1 st USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research & Development Seminar, Sarclay, France, June 16- 19, 1997. 13 Federal Aviation Administration, "Air Traffic Organization Control", Order JO 7110.65U CHG 2, March 7, 2013 URL: http://www.faa.gov [cited 1 February 2013].



	
		U.S. Airport Infrastructure and Sustainable Aviation Fuel
		
			KristiMoriarty
		
		
			AllisonKvien
		
		10.2172/1768316
		
	
	
		14 Federal Aviation Administration, 2011-2015 National Plan of Integrated Airport Systems Report
		
			Office of Scientific and Technical Information (OSTI)
			
		
	
	cited 28 October 2012
	14 Federal Aviation Administration, 2011-2015 National Plan of Integrated Airport Systems Report, URL: http://aspm.faa.gov [cited 28 October 2012].


				
			
		
	
