
	
	
		
INTRODUCTIONAutomatic Dependent Surveillance [1] transponders allow the surveillance of airplane states using a communicative onboard unit, instead of relying solely on traditional radar-based surveillance systems.It is currently functional under the Broadcast (ADS-B) and the Contract (ADS-C) protocols.The ADS-B signal is emitted from the aircraft's Mode-S or C, transponder to provide surveillance data.The surveillance data includes aircraft position, velocity, as determined from a Global Navigation Satellite System, and additional elements of navigational intent and meteorological data.The aircraft information is automatically transmitted periodically without flight crew or operator input.The transmission is dependent on proper operation of on-board equipment that determines state and availability of a sending system.ADS-B applications broadcast the data to anyone listening, traditionally other suitably equipped aircraft or ground stations, which allows Air Traffic Control to automatically and periodically access data for use and re-broadcast (called ADS-R).Space-based ADS-B receivers have demonstrated the ability to relay messages received from manned aircraft in remote locations, to ground stations [2], [3].The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) forecasts seven million small unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) [4] to be operational by 2020, of which 2.6 million will be commercial.NASA postulates the demand for low-altitude UAS to rise for a variety of applications including infrastructure monitoring, precision agriculture, search and rescue, and delivery of goods.The NASA UAS Traffic Management (UTM) project is a systemic research approach to prototype technologies for a traffic management system that could develop airspace integration requirements for enabling safe, efficient lowaltitude operations.Research results will be transferred to the FAA for further testing.ADS-B transponders are being considered a potential method of UAS surveillance and recent studies have shown the major impact of co-channel interference from UAS on General Aviation (GA), especially for high density operations [5], [6].This paper presents a model for computing probability of successful ADS-B message reception, given transponder power, receiver sensitivity, ADS-B protocol parameters, UAS and GA traffic densities and squawk power, allowed latency, repeat frequency, range between transponders and ground station distribution.Results are expected to inform the bounds for UAS operations within national airspace.
II. COMMUNICATION MODELING METHODOLOGYThe 1090-ES ADS-B Reception model, developed by NASA Langley Research Center for manned aviation, as presented in [7], whose results have been validated against reception parameters in a 1999 flight test data, has been used as a starting point for our novel UAS communication model.Our model uses different parameters and standards for UAS flight, models probabilistic impact of repeated messaging and investigates trade-offs between many operational scenarios.
A. Validated Model for Manned Aviation CommunicationADS-B reception probability is modeled as a discrete convolution of Poisson random variables for the 1090 MHz channel [7].This channel is also used by aircraft to respond to the Traffic Collision Avoidance Systems using Mode S or C transponders and secondary surveillance radars (SSR) of the Air
B. Adapted Model for Unmanned Aviation CommunicationThe single message decode probabilities in Eq. ( 1) are computed using minimum receiver sensitivity and success criteria for block tests, set by DO-260A for Class A3 ADS-B on UAS.Mean FRUITs use SSR density data from [7] since only manned aircraft will be interrogated.State reports are set at 2Hz for 1090ES and 1Hz for 978UAT.The probability of successful reception increases with the repeated pings (y in number) and is given by binomial probability (P) as:P=1-(1-p) y (2) We use the traffic densities in [5] as representative examples of high traffic.We assume a 2D model and density because the height of the cylindrical volume in [5] is very small compared to the diameter.If the availability of ADS-R is assumed, traffic can be up to double of that shown, for those aircraft that have signed up for ADS-R, TIS-B and FIS-B client services.
III. UAS COMMUNICATION RESULTSThe results from varying the key parameters show that only <1W transponders on UAS will allow reliable communication using ADS-B, given the assumed traffic.They set upper bounds for allowed traffic, given power and reliability.Nautical miles (NM) are standard units in the FAA.Integrating ADS-B into the UTM also requires that receivers be available within reception range.While online crowdsourced data show ~600 ground receivers in the continental U.S., our tests indicate the need for more, to support high density, beyond line of sight operations.
A. Instantaneous and Binomial Probability of ReceptionFor a uniform density of UAS and GA in an area, squawking at 10W and 25W respectively, the probability of an ADS-B receiver decoding any packet from another ADS-B transmitter depends more steeply on the traffic density than the transmitter power -Figure 1. Secondary traffic's power ('noise') is varied independent of primary transmitter power in this section for representative purposes.While range increases with transmit power, positive probability of message decode is possible only up to 1.74 UAS per sq.NM if they transmit at 10W.The number of message repeats required to transmit with 1σ,2σ, 3σ reliability increases with traffic and range, for any transmit power, to make up for lowering instantaneous probability -Figure 2. Sensitivity to GA is negligible due to its relatively low traffic.
B. GA Decode Sensitivity to UAS Traffic and PowerThe NASA-FAA Research Transition Team has set a tentative upper limit of 10 seconds of no update on the primary communication link, after which UAS operators are required to activate their secondary or execute procedures to mitigate loss of link.In this section, we assume successful transmission if the state is communicated at 2σ reliability within 20 messages (2Hz).An ADS-B transponder with power 125W (or 25W) on a manned aircraft/GA has a maximum transmission range of 96NM (or 42NM) when there are no squawking UAS in the area -Figure 3. Increasing UAS traffic and power reduces the effective range drastically, more so if the GA transmit power is lower.Since the FAA has mandated all aircraft flying in most controlled airspace to be ADS-B 1090ES equipped by 2020, allowing dense UAS traffic on this frequency poses a risk to the full effectiveness of that mandate.The theoretical upper limit of UAS traffic density such that GA ADS-B messages can be decoded decreases with GA and UAS power because the GA and UAS traffic noise increases -Figure 4.This limit is almost insensitive to transmit power, if it is increased independently from traffic 'noise' power.
C. UAS Decode Sensitivity to all Traffic and PowerMessage collision interference from dense UAS traffic was found to be of concern for UAS communication as well, therefore will affect traffic allowed on 978UAT.The maximum range between any pair of ADS-B transmitter and receiver on UAS such that there exists 95% probability of decoding each other's state within 10 seconds, increases with UAS transmit power and, after an inflexion point, drops off drastically due to message interference -Figure 5.This inflection occurs at shorter ranges for denser traffic.For example, at 17.41 UAS per sq.NM, there is no gain in range for transmit power more than 0.06W and no reliable reception more than 0.085W.For the least dense case of 1.74 UAS per sq.NM, a maximum range of 5.8 NM is possible at transmit power 0.68W and decode reliability drops to less than 95% at power 0.14W.If GA traffic is removed from this simulation, the maximum range and thus transmit limit is only slightly higher, e.g.6.2NM at 0.73W.The model helps set a theoretical upper limit to UAS transmit power given expected traffic, and vice versa.Sponsor: NASA Unmanned Aircraft Systems Traffic Management Project Traffic Control Radar Beacon System using Mode A and C transponders.The model allows for up to five ATCRBS and one Mode S FRUIT overlaps, as specified in RTCA document DO-260A.ADS-B single message reception probability (p) is: p=[d(0)P(0;m A )P(0;m s )]+ [∑ d A (x)P(x;m A ) 5 x=1 ] P(0;m s )+ [d S (1)P(1;m S )]P(0;m A )+ [∑ d A (x)P(x;m A ) 5 x=1 ] [d S (1)P(1;m S )] (1) P(x;m) is the Poisson probability of x given m FRUIT overlaps, m is the mean FRUIT Mode A/C or S overlaps (computed as function of number of aircraft within receiving distance and number of interrogators with appropriate beams) and d(x) is the single message decode probability with x FRUIT overlaps.The model cleanly separates d(x) as a function of transponder power, range and sensitivity and P(x;m) as a function of other/secondary air traffic in the area and their power ('noise').
Figure 1 :Figure 2 :12Figure 1: Packet decode probability with increasing power, traffic
Figure 3 :Figure 4 :34Figure 3: Allowable range between GA ADS-B transmitter and receiver to ensure 95% probability of state update within 10 seconds
Figure 5 :5Figure 5: Allowable range between UAS ADS-B transmitter and receiver to ensure 95% probability of state update within 10 seconds IV.DISCUSSION Our results show that UAS ADS-B can be used for vehicleto-vehicle/ground surveillance only at very low power and short distances, given the traffic numbers assumed, beyond which it will adversely affect manned aviation surveillance and itself.The results presented are a function of ADS-B protocol and UAS operational examples.If the protocol for ADS-B were to allow more frequent updates, variable message lengths or exclusive GA/UAS traffic, or if sense-and-avoid operations were to allow more latency time for state updates, or any other traffic changes, they could relax the power and density limits presented.Our model allows for easy change of parameter values to test the impact of such protocol, power, traffic or operational changes on the integration of ADS-B or similar technologies with UAS.Policy recommendations are outside the scope of this paper, therefore have not been proposed.
		
		
			

				


	
		Overview of the FAA ADS-B link decision
		
			JScardina
		
	
	
		Off. Syst. Archit. Invest. Anal. Fed. Aviat. Adm
		
			2002
		
	
	J. Scardina, "Overview of the FAA ADS-B link decision," Off. Syst. Archit. Invest. Anal. Fed. Aviat. Adm., 2002.



	
		GOMX-1 Flight Experience and Air Traffic Monitoring Results
		
			LAlminde
		
		
			KKaas
		
		
			MBisgaard
		
		
			JChristiansen
		
		
			DGerhardt
		
	
	
		AIAA/USU Small Satellite Conference
		Logan, Utah
		
			2014
		
	
	L. Alminde, K. Kaas, M. Bisgaard, J. Christiansen, and D. Gerhardt, "GOMX-1 Flight Experience and Air Traffic Monitoring Results," AIAA/USU Small Satellite Conference, Logan, Utah, 2014.



	
		A Simulation of the Reception of Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast Signals in Low Earth Orbit
		
			RVan Der Pryt
		
		
			RVincent
		
	
	
		Int. J. Navig. Obs
		
			2015. 2015
		
	
	R. Van Der Pryt and R. Vincent, "A Simulation of the Reception of Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast Signals in Low Earth Orbit," Int. J. Navig. Obs., vol. 2015, 2015.



	
		Unmanned aircraft system traffic management (utm) concept of operations
		
			PKopardekar
		
		
			JRios
		
		
			TPrevot
		
		
			MJohnson
		
		
			JJung
		
		
			JRobinson
		
	
	
		16th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference
		
			AIAA Aviation
			2016
		
	
	P. Kopardekar, J. Rios, T. Prevot, M. Johnson, J. Jung, and J. Robinson, "Unmanned aircraft system traffic management (utm) concept of operations," in 16th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference, AIAA Aviation, 2016.



	
		ADS-B Surveillance System Performance With Small UAS at Low Altitudes
		
			MGuterres
		
		
			SJones
		
		
			GOrrell
		
		
			RStrain
		
	
	
		AIAA Information Systems-AIAA Infotech @ Aerospace, 0 vols
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			2017
		
	
	M. Guterres, S. Jones, G. Orrell, and R. Strain, "ADS-B Surveillance System Performance With Small UAS at Low Altitudes," in AIAA Information Systems-AIAA Infotech @ Aerospace, 0 vols., American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 2017.



	
		ADS-B Surveillance In High Density SUAS Applications at Low Altitudes
		
			MGuterres
		
		
			SJones
		
		
			SVMissimini
		
		
			RStrain
		
	
	
		International Symposium on Enhanced Solutions for Aircraft and Vehicle Surveillance Applications
		Berlin, Germany
		
			2016
		
	
	M. Guterres, S. Jones, S. V. Missimini, and R. Strain, "ADS-B Surveillance In High Density SUAS Applications at Low Altitudes," presented at the International Symposium on Enhanced Solutions for Aircraft and Vehicle Surveillance Applications, Berlin, Germany, 2016.



	
		1090 Extended Squitter Automatic Dependent Surveillance -Broadcast (ADS-B) Reception Model for Air-Traffic-Management Simulations
		
			WWChung
		
		
			RStaab
		
	
	
		AIAA Modeling and Simulation Technologies Conference and Exhibit
		Keystone, Colorado
		
			AIAA
			2006
			
		
	
	W. W. Chung, R. Staab, "1090 Extended Squitter Automatic Dependent Surveillance -Broadcast (ADS-B) Reception Model for Air-Traffic- Management Simulations," AIAA Modeling and Simulation Technologies Conference and Exhibit, Keystone, Colorado, 2006, AIAA 6.2006-6614.


				
			
		
	
