
	
	
		
I. INTRODUCTION
A. BackgroundAirports represent key nodes of the air transport network, and its airport surface is undoubtedly one of the most complex and challenging areas.The Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen) [1] program and the Single European Sky ATM Research program (SESAR) [2] initiatives, respectively, are dealing with these challenges.To jointly address this research area, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the German Aerospace Center (DLR) established a research collaboration in 2012 entitled "Coordinated Arrival, Departure and Surface Operations" to develop harmonized concepts of operations and simulation tools to improve airport surface traffic operations by reducing delays and environmental impacts, such as emissions and noise pollution.In recent years, innovative processes for airport surface operations have been introduced: Airport Collaborative Decision Making (A-CDM) in Europe [3] and Surface Collaborative Decision Making (S-CDM) in the U.S. [4].A-CDM and S-CDM facilitate information sharing between the involved airport stakeholders, increasing situation awareness while decreasing negative environmental impacts [5].In addition, with A-CDM, the pre-departure sequence planning concept was introduced to calculate off-block times to reduce runway queues and surface congestion.In S-CDM, the metering of departure traffic flows during times of imbalances between capacity and demand is activated based on a target queue length of the considered departure runways, and target times for departure aircraft to enter the Airport Movement Area (AMA) are provided to the user.NASA and DLR have independently investigated CDM concepts, developed required technologies, and tested prototype decision support tools in their own operational environments.The analysis in this paper will focus on the ramp area at U.S. airports, called the non-movement area (equivalent to the apron area in Europe), which includes gates (or stands), whereby the traffic is controlled by the ramp control tower(s) commonly managed by airlines (in Europe airport ramp/apron operations are managed by the airport or Air Traffic Control (ATC) depending on the size of the airport).The Air Traffic Control Tower (ATCT) managed by the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) is responsible for the traffic in the movement area, which includes taxiways and runways (equivalent to the maneuvering area in Europe).The spots are the locations where control of traffic is transferred between the ramp control tower and ATCT.The sequence resulting from the handover of departure aircraft between these two control entities greatly affects the departure sequence at the runway.In the S-CDM environment, departure aircraft subject to metering are assigned with Target Movement Area entry Times (TMATs) provided by the metering tool, which are derived from the runway schedule [4].Better conformance of the TMATs by departure flights leads to higher chances of the aircraft taking off from the runway at their predicted Target Takeoff Times (TTOTs).However, in current operations, due to uncertainties in the pushback process and traffic conditions in the congested ramp area, it is quite challenging for the ramp control personnel to meet TMATs.Therefore, the S-CDM procedure allows a relatively large compliance window (e.g., ±5 minutes).
B. Related works -DLR's Surface ResearchAddressing airport surface congestion, DLR developed a research prototype for ATCT ground and local controllers to meter aircraft at the gate and the runway by introducing ATC clearance times for pushback, engine start-up, taxi, line-up and takeoff based on nominal taxi-out and taxi-in times [6].The Controller Assistance for Departure Optimization (CADEO), which is an implementation of a departure management system (DMAN), was developed as part of European research project for the optimization of airport surface traffic.CADEO provides an optimal runway schedule with the objectives of increased throughput and reduced taxi delay and emissions [7] [8].DLR recently developed a tool generating conflict-free taxi trajectories implemented by speed advisories based on the principle of a surface management system (SMAN) [9].The Taxi Routing for Aircraft: Creation and Controlling (TRACC), DLR's SMAN implementation, is one of the enabling technologies for A-CDM along with the Advanced Surface Movement Guidance and Control System (A-SMGCS).The speed advisories and the routes are shown to the controller who guides the aircraft via radio [10].This prototype was successfully evaluated via human-in-the-loop (HITL) simulations at DLR in 2013 [11].Because TRACC is able to generate optimized taxi-out and taxi-in times, it was integrated with the runway scheduling capability of CADEO [12] and tested in a HITL simulation [11].With some enhancements made to the CADEO-TRACC system, the performance of the integrated system was assessed in automated real-time simulations.The results showed that the runway queue length did not exceed more than one aircraft and the departures received their line-up clearances shortly after reaching the runway holding point [13].
C. Related works -NASA's Surface ResearchSimilarly, there has been ongoing research in the U.S. focused on efficient and safe surface operations through development of schedule optimization and enhanced flight deck capabilities.NASA has developed the Spot and Runway Departure Advisor (SARDA), a research prototype decision support tool to provide tactical advisories to ramp and ATCT controllers.Initially, SARDA's spot and runway sequence advisories were evaluated for ATCT ground and local controllers [14].Later, the SARDA capabilities were extended to the ramp area and provided gate pushback advisories to the airline ramp controllers [15].In both cases, SARDA was tested in a HITL simulation environment at NASA.The runway schedule of departure flights was generated through a combination of optimization and heuristic algorithms, which aimed to maximize runway throughput [16].The HITL experiments showed promising results concerning the performance of the tool (i.e., taxi delays and environmental impacts), as well as human factors metrics (e.g., workload, usability, and situational awareness) [14] [15].More recently, under NASA's Airspace Technology Demonstration 2 (ATD-2) subproject, the Integrated Arrival, Departure, and Surface (IADS) system was developed in coordination with the FAA and aviation industry.Since September 2017, the Phase 1 ATD-2 IADS system has been deployed at various facilities in Charlotte Douglas International Airport (CLT), North Carolina, including the FAA's ATCT and American Airlines Control Center (i.e., ramp tower), CLT Terminal Radar Approach Control (TRACON), and Washington Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC) for field evaluation.One of the core capabilities in the Phase 1 IADS system is surface metering.The tactical surface scheduler generates the runway schedule based on airlines' Earliest Off-Block Times (EOBTs) and provides gate pushback advisories to the ramp controller according to the surface metering strategies set by the user [17].NASA's flight deck research on the NextGen Surface Trajectory Based Operations (STBO) has been focused on conformance of 4D taxi clearances through investigation of various options for displaying information to the pilots and evaluating pilot performance and related human factors in high-fidelity flight simulations [18] [19].In Ref. [19] SARDA was integrated with the flight deck, where pilots were presented with a graphical representation of a fourdimensional taxi trajectory (4DT) and speed advisory to support conformance to the surface schedule generated by SARDA.Simulation results showed that pilots were able to follow the 4DT under manual control with a time deviation of ±15 seconds from target takeoff times shown on the flight deck display [19].
D. MotivationNASA and DLR jointly developed a concept of operations for trajectory-based taxi operations where 4DTs are generated, combined with an optimized runway schedule supported by conformance monitoring and supporting flight deck technologies to execute 4DTs on the airport surface [20].Based on this concept, NASA and DLR conducted joint research where independent, parallel simulations were conducted to compare the performance of CADEO-TRACC and SARDA tools [21].In both simulations, a common traffic scenario from Hamburg International Airport (Germany), was used under the same traffic conditions.Also, a set of common performance metrics was jointly developed based on the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)'s Key Performance Areas (KPAs) and Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) proposed by the Civil Air Navigation Services Organization (CANSO).Simulation results showed that both CADEO-TRACC and SARDA tools were able to improve taxi efficiency while maintaining runway throughput under normal traffic conditions.The study presented in this paper investigates the TRACC conflict-free taxi capability applied to a relatively larger US airport (CLT), but constrained to the ramp operations, and compares the performance with that of a nominal baseline capability.NASA's Surface Operations Simulator and Scheduler (SOSS) [22], a fast-time surface traffic simulation environment, was used for the study.The application of the TRACC tool in this study is envisioned to enable a much tighter TMAT compliance by providing conflict-free trajectories for aircraft in real-time.The outcome of this conflict-free trajectory calculation can be provided to the ramp controller and flight deck in the form of gate pushback times for departures, also referred to as Target Startup Approval Times (TSATs), Target Movement area Exit Times (TMET) for arrivals, and speed commands for both arrivals and departures.This paper describes the technical approach in detail and the results of the simulation experiment of ramp taxi operations at CLT.The operational benefits that can be achieved include improved predictability, reduced taxi delays, and reduced fuel/emissions in ramp operations.Ideally, the conflict-free taxi scheduling should be extended to cover the entire span of taxi operation on the surface to provide downstream benefits, such as reduced airborne delays, fuel savings and increased predictability, thus enabling gateto-gate trajectory-based operations (TBO).The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces the operational concepts and tools of NASA and DLR that were the basis for this investigation.Section III describes the simulation setup including the chosen performance metrics.Section IV presents the simulation results and discussion, followed by section V with a summary and future research plans.
II. OPERATIONAL CONCEPTS AND TOOLS BY DLR AND NASAA. Surface Optimization Tools of DLR DLR developed TRACC as an implementation of an SMAN: create, control and always maintain conflict-free taxi trajectories for all aircraft ground movements.These requirements fulfil the following procedure stated in [6]: Plan => Execute => Measure => Adapt.Enabling technologies for TRACC include the following assumptions: The aircraft positions are always known; 4DTs are sent to the flight deck via datalink; and the aircraft are able to comply with speed advisories.TRACC uses speed advisories for controlling aircraft in accordance with the calculated trajectory.Alternative aircraft taxiing systems, such as electric taxi [23], the usage of Taxibots (e.g., ZETO project at University of Darmstadt, Germany) [24], and additional support tools, will make it possible for the pilots to meet prescribed taxi speeds.TRACC is designed as a generic tool which can be easily adapted to any airport layout using a special editor tool for the creation of datasets where all necessary information is mapped.This model with an underlying node-link system is used together with flight plan information to create conflict free, optimized and time-based taxi routes (4DTs), each including a speed profile, for all aircraft on the airport.For the creation of these trajectories an Evolutionary Algorithm is used.Besides the trajectory creation, TRACC provides Air Traffic Controllers (ATCOs) with necessary taxi advisories resulting from the proposed trajectories.In addition, conformance monitoring (i.e., location and time) of each aircraft is carried out.In case of nonconformance, the trajectory is adapted to the aircraft's actual position and speed and recalculated, if necessary.This requires an automatic conflict detection and resolution (CD&R) function for TRACC.For trajectory recalculation two main principles are applied in TRACC: the "Principle of Lowest Workload" and the "Principle of Smallest Modification."For the first, actual commands are sent to the controller only when changes are caused by trajectory deviations.The second principle means that trajectories should stay as close to a set of standard trajectories (predefined) as possible, and that only aircraft deviating from the advised taxi trajectory are penalized.The management of pushback time is an essential part of SMAN because off-block times may influence the duration of every aircraft moving on the ground.For example, aircraft pushing back can block taxiways for other aircraft (i.e., pushback conflicts), resulting in negative environmental impacts and excessive fuel burn [25].Therefore, a sophisticated combination of pushback management and Target Start-up Approval Time (TSAT) management is implemented in TRACC which calculates the best TSAT for every aircraft, considering taxiing aircraft and TTOTs created by a DMAN.The main goal is not only to hold departures as long as possible at the parking positions (i.e., gates or stands), but to reach the departure runway in time with conflict-free taxi routes.In case TRACC cannot find a solution to meet the runway schedule, the runway scheduling function in DMAN (i.e., CADEO) has to adapt the schedule [12].Details are available in Ref. [13].The main difference from conventional ramp management is holding aircraft at the parking position as opposed to releasing them as they are ready.Reducing uncertainty in arrival times at the departure runway is one of the most important tasks for a surface management system like TRACC [26].It is accomplished by monitoring all aircraft movements, updating the trajectories using the actual position and speed, and creating new trajectories in case of conflicts or missed arrival times at the departure runway.TRACC has an integrated CD&R functionality to monitor conformance to the original 4DT and maintain conflict-free separation.TRACC's CD&R functionality consists of the following components:1. Identification of deviations from the planned trajectory 2. Adaptation of the planned trajectory to the actual deviation in position and speed  SOSS models the airport surface as a node-link network representing gates, spots, taxiways, crossings, and runways.SOSS maintains a database of aircraft performance characteristics, such as taxi speed, acceleration, and deceleration for a variety of aircraft types.SOSS also has wake-vortex separation matrices for runway operations, so that two consecutive runway operations are temporally separated based on the weight class of aircraft.SOSS has a built-in surface CD&R logic that prevents aircraft from loss of separation in trail or head-on collisions while taxiing on the airport surface.SOSS also has capabilities to model uncertainties, including pushback process, taxi speed, and flight ready time, via different types of probability distributions.SOSS connects to surface schedulers through a socket and uses a protocol called the Common Algorithm Interface (CAI), which allows the researchers to test different schedulers without changing the simulation engine (see Fig. 1).The scheduler receives current locations of aircraft, speed, routes, and estimated arrival times at key positions, including spots and runways through CAI and returns release times of aircraft at key airport locations, such as gates, spots, and runways.The SOSS simulation engine has been validated against operational data from multiple airports [22] [29], where key performance metrics, such as taxi in/out times, departure throughput, and departure rates, are compared between simulation results and operational data.Initial location and time on final approach for arrival aircraft are prescribed in a traffic scenario according to the operational data.The SOSS fast-time simulation tool has been utilized for NASA's surface research to assess the surface metering concepts developed for SARDA and ATD-2.Traffic scenarios generated from real operations were used for simulations to evaluate scheduler performance and operational benefits in efficiency, predictability, and throughput [21][30][31] [32].
C. Integration of NASA and DLR Tools in SOSSThe purpose of the integration of TRACC with SOSS in this study is to explore optimized 4D trajectory-based surface traffic management at busy hub airports in the U.S. based on the TRACC functions: TSAT and pushback management.As a first step, ramp area traffic management was considered.The rationale for restricting the application to the ramp area is to make the problem size for optimization by TRACC manageable.In addition, the traffic in the ramp and Airport Movement Area (AMA) are separately managed by airlines and ATC.TRACC is expected to achieve reduction in taxi delay by holding aircraft at parking positions instead of risking an overcrowded ramp area and to ensure a reliable departure time.With a decreased number of active aircraft taxiing in the ramp area, safety will also be improved.For the integration of TRACC into SOSS several changes were carried out: 1) a set of prescribed taxi trajectories between each combination of origin and destination nodes on the surface was constructed and stored, where only speed changes are allowed for optimization instead of creating new routes; 2) because the application area was restricted to the apron / ramp area, TMATs were used as targets for optimizing departure trajectories in the ramp area instead of using TLUTs at the runway as was the case in the original TRACC implementation; and 3) SOSS was adapted in such a way that speed changes are linear to ensure the same speed profiles are used in SOSS simulation as for the calculation of trajectories implemented by TRACC.The adapted version of TRACC was called TRACC_PB (TRACC for pushback optimization).TRACC_PB receives target times at assigned spots (i.e., TMATs for departures and TMETs for arrivals) from an external source (i.e., SOSS) for departures/arrivals to exit/ enter the ramp area.It will then generate conflict-free taxi trajectories and calculate engine start-up times for all departures from assigned TMATs and, similarly, the expected gate-in time for the arrivals from TMETs.The start-up time is the time a departure aircraft should leave the parking position in order to reach the spot at its assigned TMAT without interfering with other aircraft and reaches the TMAT in time.If TRACC_PB is unable to obtain a conflict-free trajectory for the aircraft with the given TMAT, SOSS informes it of the next earliest time the aircraft can reach the assigned spot.If necessary, arrival aircraft will be held at the entering spot until a conflict-free trajectory in the ramp exists.SOSS requests for TRACC_PB trajectory updates are event driven.Each time a new flight needs a taxi trajectory, SOSS calls TRACC_PB with the new request.TRACC_PB performs a trajectory optimization for the considered aircraft to accommodate the new trajectory without changing the existing trajectories of other flights.This ensures that there are no adjustments to the trajectories that have already been calculated.This way, all optimized trajectories of conformed aircraft become a constraint to the new trajectory optimization of the non-conformed aircraft.Otherwise, a global optimization could lead to an unstable system of trajectories, where trajectories are changed too often.TRACC_PB exercises flexibility by varying speeds, pushback times and ramp entry time, if necessary.The following assumptions have been made for connecting TRACC_PB and SOSS: Standard routes with associated speeds must be known including a list of nodes with coordinates, and nominal and maximum taxi speeds. The time between beginning of start-up / pushback and decoupling the towing vehicle must be known. Because the route between each parking position and spot is predefined, only speed optimization is carried out. For each aircraft the positions on its trajectory as well as parking position and spot should be known to TRACC_PB for conflict calculation. The earliest possible TSAT, set by Scheduled Off-Block Time (SOBT) in this study, for each aircraft, must be known as a lower bound for the calculation of the appropriate TSAT to meet the TMAT.The coordination between TRACC_PB and SOSS is carried out in the following way: Flight data is transmitted to TRACC_PB when an aircraft receives the first TMET / TMAT.Updates can be sent with the same type of message and structure as the first flight data.The same data structure is used to send the necessary information from TRACC_PB to SOSS (e.g., CMAT / CMET and new speed profile). SOSSBecause the taxi routes are predefined, only position and spot need to be included in the flight information along with the type (arrival / departure), status (inactive / moving / leaving / update), actual position, and a list of speeds for every waypoint.
III. SIMULATION SETUP
A. Airport and traffic scenarioFig.
B. Joint system setup of integrated simulationTwo simulations were set up for this evaluation.They were run in sequence, as shown in Fig. 3.The first one, called baseline simulation, used an emulated SARDA runway scheduler connected to SOSS.The scheduler computed the runway departure schedule, and then calculated the gate pushback times (TSATs) and TMATs.The same TMATs and TMETs for departures and arrivals, respectively, were then imported to the second simulation, called TRACC_PB simulation, where TRACC_PB was connected to SOSS.The simulation results from the TRACC_PB simulation are compared with the baseline simulation results.
C. Performance metricsA set of performance metrics was defined for a meaningful evaluation of the simulation runs, as shown in Table 1.These metrics were derived from the KPAs identified by ICAO [27] and the KPIs recommended by CANSO regarding the operational performance of air navigation service provider [28].Departure and arrival ramp throughputs are calculated based on Actual Movement Area entry Times (AMATs) and Actual In-Block Times (AIBTs), respectively.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONA. Ramp throughput Fig. 4 shows the histogram of ramp throughput for arrivals and departures resulting from the baseline and TRACC_PB simulations shown in 10-minute intervals during the 2.5 hourlong scenario.The black dashed line indicates the number of departures based on the TMATs as a reference for departure demand.The ramp throughputs are comparable in the beginning of the departure bank until when the arrival bank starts.The main difference in the departure ramp throughput can be seen during the arrival peak at around 9,200 secs into the simulation.The baseline model maintains the demand (black dashed line) while TRACC_PB shifts the demand to a later time (around 10,400 secs into the simulation).Similarly, the baseline simulation shows higher arrival throughput through the middle of the arrival bank (9,200 secs into the run).With TRACC_PB, on the other hand, arrival entry into the ramp area is delayed in the beginning of the arrival bank and the throughput regains later in the simulation (11,000 secs into the run).The operational concept for both baseline and TRACC_PB tools is to hold aircraft at the gates with engines off by shifting some excess taxi time from runway queue to the gates.The goal of TRACC_PB, in particular, is to provide conflict-free routes whereby the aircraft is able to taxi without stoppage.Therefore, the difference in throughput values will be reflected in the ramp taxi and gate hold times.
B. Ramp taxi timesFig. 5 shows the ramp taxi times for baseline and TRACC_PB simulations for departures (Out) and arrivals (In).It is evident that the TRACC_PB simulation shows shorter ramp taxi times compared to the baseline simulation.The average and total values of ramp taxi times are shown in Table 2.In the baseline simulation, departure aircraft spent 36 secs more on average and 2,296 secs (38.27 minutes) more in total for taxi in the ramp area compared to TRACC_PB, which has a reduction of 16.9% in average and 17.3% in total.Similarly, in the baseline simulation, arrival aircraft spent 20 secs more on and 1,502 secs (25.03 minutes) more in total for taxi in the ramp area compared to TRACC_PB which shows 9.3% reduction on average and 9.2% in total.The CD&R function in SOSS was used in the baseline simulation to resolve conflicts between taxiing aircraft in the ramp area, which may slow down and stop the aircraft to avoid a conflict situation, thus resulting in longer taxi times.TRACC_PB first attempts to solve for conflict-free ramp taxi routes for arrivals with the TMETs given by the baseline run.In the case that TRACC_PB is not able to produce a conflictfree route, TRACC_PB adjusts the TMET and holds the aircraft at the spot until the new TMET is reached, so that the aircraft is able to taxi to the gate without stoppage.It is important to note that the baseline simulation used SOSS' nominal ramp taxi speed that depends on the aircraft type with 12 knots as the maximum speed.TRACC_PB, on the other hand, allowed the aircraft to taxi up to 15 knots to take advantage of conflict-free trajectories.
C. Gate hold timesBoth baseline and TRACC_PB concepts provide operational benefits in terms of taxi efficiency and fuel/emissions savings by shifting some of the excess taxi time from runway queue to the gates.Fig. 6 shows the distribution of departure gate hold times realized by the baseline and TRACC_PB.The mean and total values of departure gate hold times, and the numbers of aircraft held at the gates are shown in Table 3.In the TRACC_PB simulation, departures were held at their gates 91 secs longer on average and 5,687 secs (94.78 minutes) longer in total compared to the baseline.It is evident that the gate hold times with TRACC_PB are longer (at least 20%) because TRACC_PB holds departures at the gates until conflict-free routes are available, whereas the baseline model tends to push back aircraft close to their assigned pushback times (TSATs).Interestingly, TRACC_PB held less aircraft at the gate than the baseline (i.e., 49 vs. 62), indicating the tendency to adhere to the original departure schedule, which may be seen as counter-intuitive.However, the number of aircraft held at the gate for a considerable amount of time (e.g., > 60 secs) was similar between the two simulations (i.e., 42 for TRACC_PB vs. 43 for baseline, numbers not shown in the table).It is important to note that the amount of gate hold times associated with each departure gate generated by TRACC_PB depends on the taxi route that leads to the assigned spot because every taxi route for the gate-spot pair has a different potential for conflicts due to ramp traffic patterns, which can cause the aircraft to stop.D. Aggregate departure spot queue size Fig. 7 shows the total number of departure aircraft taxiing in the ramp area between the baseline and TRACC_PB simulations at each instance of time, which also indicates the level of ramp congestion.It is important to note that this is a cumulative view for all five departure spots (Fig. 2) without separating the result by departure spot.The figure shows that the numbers of taxiing aircraft between the two simulations are similar early in the departure bank until approximately 8,200 secs into the run.As the bank progresses, more departure flights are scheduled to push back, and the number of taxiing aircraft for the baseline remains high whereas that of TRACC_PB decreases.The aggregate queue size for TRACC_PB continues to decrease until 9,000-9,100 secs, where the difference between the two simulations reaches six aircraft, after which the queue size increases again.This occurs approximately at the same time when the difference in ramp throughput for departures and arrivals together between the two simulations has reached the maximum (Fig. 4).It is shown that the ramp departure queue/congestion period for TRACC_PB lasts six minutes longer than for the baseline (approximately 10,700 secs vs. 10,300 secs  difference of 400 secs) due to the fact that TRACC_PB's conflict-free routes have caused longer gate hold times, leading to taking more time to flush departures out of the ramp.Fig. 8 shows the comparison of TMAT compliance between the baseline and TRACC_PB simulations.The middle box plot shows the TMAT compliance of TRACC_PB with the original TMATs given by the baseline run.TRACC_PB shows the better compliance with the baseline given TMATs than the baseline case itself.Table 4 shows the comparison of TMAT compliance in percentile values up to the 90 th percentile.It is noted that TRACC_PB outperformed the baseline in 80% of the situations.The right box plot in the figure shows the same metric of TRACC_PB with adjusted TMATs, which shows almost perfect compliance (except for one situation) as the aircraft are capable of following the command 4D trajectory precisely.
F. Environmental benefitsTo estimate the environmental benefits, the total amounts of fuel burn and gas emissions in the ramp are computed for the baseline and TRACC_PB simulations, as shown in Table 5.These calculations are based on ramp taxi times from two simulations and engine emission certification data from ICAO [33], with the assumption that two engines are running at a 7% thrust setting during the taxi phase.In Table 5 it is shown that with TRACC_PB there is a reduction of fuel and emissions by at least 10% for arrivals and 17% for departures.Because emissions are directly proportional to the taxi time, their reduction fits to the ramp taxi times of both departures and arrivals.
V. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORKAs part of the collaborative research investigating different airport traffic management concepts and tools developed by the research teams of DLR and NASA, an integrated simulation using NASA's fast-time simulation engine, SOSS, together with DLR's surface management tool for ATC ground control, TRACC, was conducted.As the first step of the integrated simulation study, feasibility and potential benefits of conflict-free taxi trajectories in ramp operations at a busy airport using DLR's TRACC were analyzed.In doing so, TRACC_PB was derived from the TRACC tool to facilitate conflict-free taxi trajectories using speed profile variations on fixed standard taxi routes in the ramp.Two simulation runs were conducted for the ramp area of Charlotte Douglas International Airport.The baseline simulation, representing a near-term surface management tool, was conducted using a runway scheduler derived from components of NASA's surface scheduler connected to SOSS that calculated the runway departure and gate pushback schedules (i.e., TSATs, and TMATs).The simulation for TRACC_PB was connected to SOSS and the TMATs from the baseline simulation were used as a constraint.For both simulation runs, a set of metrics adapted from ICAO KPAs and CANSO's KPIs, including capacity, efficiency, predictability and environment, was measured and compared.Both scheduling tools aimed to reduce the environmental impact and increase efficiency by holding aircraft at the gate with engines off.The simulation results showed that TRACC_PB achieved shorter taxi times, and thus less fuel consumption and engine emissions, than the baseline case by facilitating conflict-free taxi routes, enabling aircraft to taxi at higher speeds without stoppage in the ramp area.However, the ramp throughputs for departures and arrivals were shifted to later times because of aircraft holding longer at the gate and the entering spot.It was noticed, however, that the sum of total times of both departures and arrivals for TRACC_PB simulation, including ramp taxi time, and arrival spot waiting time, was higher than those from the baseline simulation.The idea of holding arrival aircraft at the entering spot was regarded as a tentative solution for TRACC_PB to enable conflict-free ramp taxi routes for arrivals.Ideally, TRACC_PB would have solved for conflict-free trajectories with both route and taxi speed as decision variables for optimization.Further investigation is warranted to explore better solutions that would avoid aircraft waiting at the entering spot.Both baseline and TRACC_PB simulations showed a good TMAT compliance according to the current S-CDM suggestions (e.g., ±5 minutes).Results indicated that TRACC_PB achieved a better compliance than the baseline in 80% of situations.The concept of TRACC_PB is still regarded as a far-term 4DT concept even though TRACC_PB was simplified from the more sophisticated TRACC to only provide the speed variations on standard taxi routes for gate-spot pairs to facilitate conflict-free taxi.The implementation of 4D taxi trajectories with speed control exceeds the scope for current day airport surface operations.However, the research community has already begun exploring new technologies for achieving 4DT surface operations that can bring significant benefits in terms of environmental and economic impacts.For example, Taxibots and electric taxi are currently being explored to support the implementation of command speed profiles.On the flight deck side, pilot-in-the-loop simulations have been conducted and showed promising results where pilots with a proper guidance display were able to follow the 4D taxi routes generated by the TRACC tool with high conformance [34].Further research activities under the collaboration between NASA and DLR include the investigation of uncertainties in the taxi process to provide robust taxi schedules and the investigation of off-nominal conditions.One of the critical aspects in implementing the concept of trajectory-based taxi operations, described in [20], is the execution of 4D taxi trajectories by the flight deck.Further analysis will be conducted to balance the research between ground-based decision support tools and the flight deck automation.3 .3Test of the adapted trajectory for conflicts 4. In case of conflicts or significant deviations from the given time constraints: creation of a new conflict-free trajectory with respect to current position, time and Target Line-up Time (TLUT) (only departures) An important prerequisite for conflict detection is the minimum distance allowed between two taxiing aircraft.The minimum distance used by TRACC is determined by the aircraft weight class, aircraft length, and wingspan to reflect aircraft engine blasts of different wake vortex classes and the aircraft sizes.B. SOSS -NASA's Fast-Time Analysis Tool NASA developed the Surface Operations Simulation and Scheduler (SOSS) fast-time simulation tool to provide a simulation platform to support development and testing of surface schedulers, such that any schedulers showing promise can be further tested in real-time systems.Fig. 1 shows the architecture diagram of SOSS.
Fig. 1 .1Fig. 1.SOSS architecture
Fig. 3 .3Fig. 3. Simulation setup, top: Baseline simulation, bottom: TRACC_PB simulation; parameters in italic are only sent when necessary.Baseline simulation -SOSS calls the runway scheduler every ten seconds.The scheduler first creates three priority groups for those flights that need to use runways.The first priority is for landing arrivals, the second for those departures that have already left the gate and are taxiing to the runways, and the last priority group contains departures still at gate.Arrival runway use times (first priority group) are scheduled at their given landing times per the scenario.Scheduling of the flights within the second priority group is ordered by their estimated runway arrival times.Flights in the last priority group still at the gate are ordered by the SOBTs.Each runway sequence is calculated according to the ordered flights in the priority groups and must satisfy the wake vortex runway separation criteria set by the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).Each flight in the runway sequence is assigned a target runway use time.The TSAT and TMAT are backward computed from the assigned target take off time.Once a departure is ready to push back, its TSAT and
of "ramp out" movements; actual movement area entry times (in 10-minute intervals or in accumulation) Capacity Arrival ramp throughput Number of "gate in" movements; actual in-block times (in 10-minute intervals or in accumulation) Capacity Departure ramp taxi time Time from pushback start to spot passing (AMAT-TSAT) Efficiency Arrival ramp taxi time Time from spot passing until arriving at gate (AIBT-AMET) Efficiency Gate hold time Time between actual off-block time (pushback start) and scheduled offblock time (TSAT-SOBT)
Fig. 4 .4Fig. 4. Ramp throughput for arrivals (blue) and departures (red); the departure demand is shown by the TMAT (dashed black line).
Fig. 5 .5Fig. 5. Ramp taxi times of departures (Out) and arrivals (In)
Fig. 6 .6Fig. 6.Departure gate hold times
Fig. 7 .7Fig. 7. Aggregate departure spot queue size E. TMAT Compliance TMAT compliance is defined as the difference between the TMAT and Actual Movement Area entry Time (AMAT) for individual aircraft.In this study, it indicates how the automation tool enables departures to meet their TMATs at assigned spots.The lower values indicate better compliance.
Fig. 8 .8Fig. 8. TMAT Compliance of Baseline and TRACC_PB; The middle boxplot has eight more outliers going up to 1,200 secs and was cropped to improve readability.
Fig.2shows the SOSS node-link graph that models CLT airport operations.Ramp area nodes are depicted in blue (taxi nodes) and red (gate nodes).Spot nodes are shown in yellow.The test traffic scenario, created from real operations data, has a total of 138 flights, 62 departures and 76 arrivals, in south flow operations.It is a medium traffic density for about 2.5 hours.In this scenario, runway 18L is a departure-only runway, runways 18R (not shown in the figure) and 23 are arrival only runways, and runway 18C is a dual usage runway.Arrivals enter the ramp area via four spots: Spot 11, Spot 12, Spot 13, and Spot 22. Departures use five spots to enter the movement area: Spot 8, Spot 9, Spot 26, Spot 27 and Spot 29.2. Node-link model in SOSS for CLT in south flow configuration
TABLE 1 .1PERFORMANCE METRICS
TABLE 2 .2AVERAGE AND TOTAL RAMP TAXI TIMES (SECONDS)BaselineTRACC_PBDifferenceAverage taxi-out time2131773616.9%Total taxi-out time13,23810,9422,29617.3%Average taxi-in time215195209.3%Total taxi-in time16,37014,8681,5029.2%
TABLE 3 .3AVERAGE AND TOTAL GATE HOLD TIMESBaseline TRACC_PBDifferenceAverage gate hold times (sec)3604519120.2%Total gate hold times (sec)22,30427,9915,687 20.3%Number of aircraft held62 (all)491321.0%
TABLE 4 .4PERCENTILE VALUES OF TMAT COMPLIANCE (SECONDS)Percentile25 th50 th75 th80 th90 thBaseline1725414387TRACC_PB002244279
TABLE 5 .5TOTAL FUEL BURN AND EMISSIONS (KG)SimulationFuelCO2HCCONOxDepartureBaseline TRACC_PB Difference (%)2,116.05 1,739.68 376.37 (17.8%)6,517.43 5,358.21 1,159.22 (17.8%)4.27 3.36 0.91 (21.3%)46.28 37.55 8.73 (18.9%)9.42 7.76 1.66 (17.6%)Baseline2,680.648,256.366.8464.1311.88ArrivalTRACC_PB Difference (%)2,410.19 270.45 (10.1%)7,423.38 832.98 (10.1%)5.59 1.25 (18.3%)56.56 7.57 (11.8%)10.65 1.23 (10.4%)
		
		

			
ACKNOWLEDGMENTThis work was a collaborative effort between DLR and NASA based on the Implementing Agreement for "Coordinated Arrival/Departure/Surface Operations Research."
			

			

				


	
		Concept of Operations for the Next Generation Air Transport System
		2018- 03-13
		
		
			Joint Planning and Development Office (JPDO
		
	
	Version 3.2, 2011
	Joint Planning and Development Office (JPDO), "Concept of Operations for the Next Generation Air Transport System," Version 3.2, 2011, available on: http://www.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a535795.pdf [2018- 03-13]



	
		
			JointSesar
		
		
			Undertaking
		
	
	
		European ATM Master Plan -The Roadmap for Delivering High Performance Aviation for Europe
		
			2012
		
	
	SESAR Joint Undertaking, "European ATM Master Plan -The Roadmap for Delivering High Performance Aviation for Europe" Factsheet, Edition 2, 2012.



	
		Airport CDM Implementation -The Manual
		
			Eurocontrol
		
		2018-06-15
		
		
			April 2012
		
	
	Eurocontrol, "Airport CDM Implementation -The Manual," April 2012, available on: http://www.eurocontrol.int/publications/airport-cdm- implementation-manual [2018-06-15]



	
		FAA Surface Collaborative Decision Making (CDM) Team, "U.S. Airport Surface Collaborative Decision Making (CDM) Concept of Operations (ConOps) in the Near-Term: Application of Surface CDM at United States Airports
		
			June 2014
		
	
	FAA Surface Collaborative Decision Making (CDM) Team, "U.S. Airport Surface Collaborative Decision Making (CDM) Concept of Operations (ConOps) in the Near-Term: Application of Surface CDM at United States Airports," June 2014.



	
		A-CDM Impact Assessment -Final Report
		
			Eurocontrol
		
		
			March 2016
		
	
	Eurocontrol, "A-CDM Impact Assessment -Final Report," March 2016.



	
		Generic Operational Concept for Predeparture Runway Sequence Planning and Accurate Take-Off Performance -Enabled by DMAN interaction with Airport CDM and A-SMGCS concepts
		
			ETuinstra
		
		
			KHaschke
		
	
	
		EUROCONTROL HQ
		
			2009
			Brussels
		
	
	E. Tuinstra, K. Haschke, "Generic Operational Concept for Pre- departure Runway Sequence Planning and Accurate Take-Off Performance -Enabled by DMAN interaction with Airport CDM and A- SMGCS concepts," EUROCONTROL HQ, Brussels, 2009.



	
		Improved Departure Management Through Integration of DMAN and A-SMGCS
		
			MSchaper
		
		
			2008. September 23-25, 2008
			German Aerospace Congress (Deutscher Luftund Raumfahrtkongress
			Darmstadt, Germany
		
	
	M. Schaper, "Improved Departure Management Through Integration of DMAN and A-SMGCS," German Aerospace Congress (Deutscher Luft- und Raumfahrtkongress) 2008, Darmstadt, Germany, September 23-25, 2008.



	
		Operational Improvements in the Context of DMAN, A-SMGCS and A-CDM
		
			MSchaper
		
	
	
		CEAS 2009 European Air and Space Conference
		Manchester, UK
		
			October 26-29, 2009
		
	
	M. Schaper, "Operational Improvements in the Context of DMAN, A- SMGCS and A-CDM," CEAS 2009 European Air and Space Conference, Manchester, UK, October 26-29, 2009.



	
		2018-04-17
		
		SESAR Concept of Operations
		
			2007
		
	
	SESAR consortium
	SESAR consortium, "SESAR Concept of Operations", WP2.2.2/D3, 2007, available on: https://www.eurocontrol.int/sites/default/files/field_tabs/content/docume nts/sesar/20070717-sesar-conops.pdf [2018-04-17]



	
		Taxi routing for aircraft: Creation and Controlling -Ground Movements with time constraints
		
			IGerdes
		
		
			ATemme
		
	
	
		Proceedings of the 2nd SESAR Innovation Days
		the 2nd SESAR Innovation DaysBraunschweig, Germany
		
			November 27-29, 2012
		
	
	I. Gerdes, A. Temme, "Taxi routing for aircraft: Creation and Controlling -Ground Movements with time constraints," Proceedings of the 2nd SESAR Innovation Days, Braunschweig, Germany, November 27-29, 2012.



	
		Controller Support for Time-Based Surface Management -First results from a feasibility workshop
		
			NCarstengerdes
		
		
			MSchaper
		
		
			SSchier
		
		
			IMetz
		
		
			AHasselberg
		
		
			IGerdes
		
	
	
		Proceedings of the 3rd SESAR Innovation Days
		the 3rd SESAR Innovation DaysStockholm, Sweden
		
			November 26-28, 2013
		
	
	N. Carstengerdes, M. Schaper, S. Schier, I. Metz, A. Hasselberg and I. Gerdes, "Controller Support for Time-Based Surface Management - First results from a feasibility workshop," Proceedings of the 3rd SESAR Innovation Days, Stockholm, Sweden, November 26-28, 2013.



	
		Trajectory Based Ground Movements and Their Coordination with Departure Management
		
			MSchaper
		
		
			IGerdes
		
	
	
		32nd Digital Avionics Systems Conference
		Syracuse, NY, USA
		
			October 6-10, 2013
		
	
	M. Schaper, I. Gerdes, "Trajectory Based Ground Movements and Their Coordination with Departure Management," 32nd Digital Avionics Systems Conference, Syracuse, NY, USA, October 6-10, 2013.



	
		Management of Time Based Taxi Trajectories coupling Departure and Surface Management Systems
		
			IGerdes
		
		
			MSchaper
		
	
	
		Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar
		
			June 23-26, 2015
			Lisbon, Portugal
		
	
	11th USA/
	I. Gerdes, M. Schaper, "Management of Time Based Taxi Trajectories coupling Departure and Surface Management Systems," 11th USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar, Lisbon, Portugal, June 23-26, 2015.



	
		Performance evaluation of a surface traffic management tool for Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport
		
			YJung
		
		
			THoang
		
		
			JMontoya
		
		
			GGupta
		
		
			WMalik
		
		
			LTobias
		
		
			HWang
		
		
			June 14-17, 2011
			Berlin, Germany
		
		
			USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar
		
	
	Y. Jung, T. Hoang, J. Montoya, G. Gupta, W. Malik, L. Tobias, and H. Wang, "Performance evaluation of a surface traffic management tool for Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport," 9th USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar, Berlin, Germany, June 14-17, 2011.



	
		Evaluation of Pushback Decision-Support Tool Concept for Charlotte Douglas International Airport Ramp Operations
		
			MHayashi
		
		
			THoang
		
		
			YJung
		
		
			WMalik
		
		
			HLee
		
		
			VDulchinos
		
	
	
		Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar
		
			June 23-26, 2015
			Lisbon, Portugal
		
	
	11th USA/
	M. Hayashi, T. Hoang, Y. Jung, W. Malik, H. Lee, and V. Dulchinos, "Evaluation of Pushback Decision-Support Tool Concept for Charlotte Douglas International Airport Ramp Operations," 11th USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar, Lisbon, Portugal, June 23-26, 2015.



	
		Runway Scheduling for Charlotte Douglas International Airport
		
			WMalik
		
		
			YJung
		
	
	
		16th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference (ATIO)
		Washington, D.C., USA
		
			June 13-17, 2016
		
	
	W. Malik, Y. Jung, "Runway Scheduling for Charlotte Douglas International Airport," 16th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference (ATIO), Washington, D.C., USA, June 13- 17, 2016.



	
		Airspace Technology Demonstration 2 (ATD-2) Concept of Use (ConUse)
		
			YJung
		
		NASA-TM-2018-29770
		
			February 2018
		
	
	Y. Jung, et al., "Airspace Technology Demonstration 2 (ATD-2) Concept of Use (ConUse)," NASA-TM-2018-29770, February 2018.



	
		Flight-deck surface trajectory-based operations (STBO): Simulation results and ConOps implications
		
			DFoyle
		
		
			BHooey
		
		
			DBakowski
		
		
			June 14-17, 2011
			Berlin, Germany
		
		
			USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar
		
	
	D. Foyle, B. Hooey, D. Bakowski, "Flight-deck surface trajectory-based operations (STBO): Simulation results and ConOps implications," 9th USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar, Berlin, Germany, June 14-17, 2011.



	
		NextGen Surface Trajectory-Based Operations (STBO): Evaluating conformance to a four-dimensional trajectory (4DT)
		
			DLBakowski
		
		
			BLHooey
		
		
			DCFoyle
		
		
			CAWolter
		
	
	
		Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics
		the 6th International Conference on Applied Human Factors and ErgonomicsLas Vegas, NV, USA
		
			July 26-30, 2015
		
	
	D. L. Bakowski, B. L. Hooey, D. C. Foyle, C. A. Wolter, "NextGen Surface Trajectory-Based Operations (STBO): Evaluating conformance to a four-dimensional trajectory (4DT)," Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics, Las Vegas, NV, USA, July 26-30, 2015.



	
		A Concept of Operation for Trajectory-based Taxi Operations
		
			NOkuniek
		
	
	
		16th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations (ATIO) Conference
		Washington D.C, USA
		
			June 13-17, 2016
		
	
	N. Okuniek, et al., "A Concept of Operation for Trajectory-based Taxi Operations," 16th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations (ATIO) Conference, Washington D.C, USA, June 13-17, 2016.



	
		Performance Evaluation of the Approaches and Algorithms for Hamburg Airport Operations
		
			ZZhu
		
		
			NOkuniek
		
		
			IGerdes
		
		
			SSchier
		
		
			HLee
		
		
			YJung
		
	
	
		35th Digital Avionics Systems Conference
		Sacramento, CA, USA
		
			September 25-29, 2016
		
	
	Z. Zhu, N. Okuniek, I. Gerdes, S. Schier, H. Lee, Y. Jung, "Performance Evaluation of the Approaches and Algorithms for Hamburg Airport Operations," 35th Digital Avionics Systems Conference, Sacramento, CA, USA, September 25-29, 2016.



	
		Validation of simulations of airport surface traffic with the surface operations simulator and scheduler
		
			RWindhorst
		
		
			August 12-14, 2013
			Los Angeles, CA, USA
		
	
	13th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operation (ATIO) Conference
	R. Windhorst, et al., "Validation of simulations of airport surface traffic with the surface operations simulator and scheduler," 13th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operation (ATIO) Conference, Los Angeles, CA, USA, August 12-14, 2013.



	
		airberlin und WheelTug unterzeichnen Absichtserklärung für Elektroantriebssystem
		
		
			2013. February 2014
		
	
	airberlin, "airberlin und WheelTug unterzeichnen Absichtserklärung für Elektroantriebssystem," 2013, available on: http://m.airberlin.com/de- DE/scms/content/show/page/news/page/201306 [Accessed February 2014]



	
		Development and Evaluation of a Speed Guidance Interface for Trajectory-Based Dispatch Towing
		
			TBernatzky
		
		
			MKemmerzell
		
		
			PMSchachtebeck
		
		
			UKlingauf
		
	
	
		36th Digital Avionics Systems Conference
		St. Petersburg, FL, USA
		
			September 17-21, 2017
		
	
	T. Bernatzky, M. Kemmerzell, P.M. Schachtebeck, U. Klingauf, "Development and Evaluation of a Speed Guidance Interface for Trajectory-Based Dispatch Towing," 36th Digital Avionics Systems Conference, St. Petersburg, FL, USA, September 17-21, 2017.



	
		Demonstration of reduced Airport Congestion Through Pushback Rate Control
		
			ISimaiakis
		
		
			June 14-17, 2011
			Berlin, Germany
		
		
			USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar
		
	
	I. Simaiakis, et al., "Demonstration of reduced Airport Congestion Through Pushback Rate Control," 9th USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar, Berlin, Germany, June 14-17, 2011.



	
		Managing departure aircraft release for efficient airport surface operations
		
			WMalik
		
		
			GGupta
		
		
			YJung
		
	
	
		AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference
		Toronto, Ontario, Canada
		
			August 2-5, 2010
		
	
	W. Malik, G. Gupta, Y. Jung, "Managing departure aircraft release for efficient airport surface operations," AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, August 2-5, 2010.



	
		Manual on global performance of the air navigation system
	
	
		Doc 9883, 1 st Edition
		Montreal, Canada, ICAO
		
			International Civil Aviation Organization
			2009
		
	
	International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), "Manual on global performance of the air navigation system," Doc 9883, 1 st Edition, Published in Montreal, Canada, ICAO, 2009.



	
		Recommended key performance indicators for measuring ANSP operational performance
		2018- 06-15
		
		
			Civil Air Navigation Services Organization
		
	
	Civil Air Navigation Services Organization (CANSO), "Recommended key performance indicators for measuring ANSP operational performance," available on: https://www.canso.org/recommended-key- performance-indicators-measuring-ansp-operational-performance [2018- 06-15]



	
		Operational Characteristics Identification and Simulation Model Validation for Incheon International Airport
		
			YEun
		
		
			DJeon
		
		
			HLee
		
		
			ZZhu
		
		
			YJung
		
	
	
		16th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operation (ATIO) Conference
		Washington D.C., USA
		
			June 13-17, 2016
		
	
	Y. Eun, D. Jeon., H. Lee, Z. Zhu, Y. Jung, "Operational Characteristics Identification and Simulation Model Validation for Incheon International Airport," 16th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operation (ATIO) Conference, Washington D.C., USA, June 13-17, 2016.



	
		Towards a Fast-Time Simulation Analysis of Benefits of the Spot and Runway Departure Advisor
		
			RWindhorst
		
	
	
		AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference
		Minneapolis, MN, USA
		
			August 13-16, 2013
		
	
	R. Windhorst, "Towards a Fast-Time Simulation Analysis of Benefits of the Spot and Runway Departure Advisor," AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference, Minneapolis, MN, USA, August 13-16, 2013.



	
		Benefits Assessment of a Surface Traffic Management Concept at a Capacity-Constrained Airport
		
			KGriffin
		
		
			ASaraf
		
		
			PYu
		
		
			SStroiney
		
		
			BLevy
		
		
			GSolveling
		
		
			J.-PClarke
		
		
			RWindhorst
		
	
	
		12th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operation (ATIO) Conference
		Indianapolis, IN, USA
		
			September 17-19, 2012
		
	
	K. Griffin, A. Saraf, P. Yu, S. Stroiney, B. Levy, G. Solveling, J.-P. Clarke, R. Windhorst, "Benefits Assessment of a Surface Traffic Management Concept at a Capacity-Constrained Airport," 12th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operation (ATIO) Conference, Indianapolis, IN, USA, September 17-19, 2012.



	
		Benefits and Cost Assessment of Integrating Arrival, Departure, and Surface Operations with ATD-2
		
			Atac
		
	
	
		NNA16BD87C
		
			March 2018
		
	
	ATAC, "Benefits and Cost Assessment of Integrating Arrival, Departure, and Surface Operations with ATD-2," NASA NRA Final Report, NNA16BD87C, March 2018.



	
		ICAO Aircraft Engine Emissions Databank
		2018-06-15
		
		
			2018
			International Civil Aviation Organization
		
	
	Issue 25A
	International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), "ICAO Aircraft Engine Emissions Databank," Issue 25A, 2018, https://www.easa.europa.eu/easa-and-you/environment/icao-aircraft- engine-emissions-databank [2018-06-15]



	
		Flight Deck Surface Trajectory-Based Operations (STBO): A Four-Dimensional Trajectory (4DT) Simulation
		
			DLBakowski
		
		
			BLHooey
		
		
			DCFoyle
		
	
	
		36th Digital Avionics Systems Conference
		St. Petersburg, FL, USA
		
			September 17-21, 2017. September 23-27, 2018
		
	
	Digital Avionics Systems Conference
	D. L. Bakowski, B. L. Hooey, D. C. Foyle, "Flight Deck Surface Trajectory-Based Operations (STBO): A Four-Dimensional Trajectory (4DT) Simulation," 36th Digital Avionics Systems Conference, St. Petersburg, FL, USA, September 17-21, 2017. 37th Digital Avionics Systems Conference September 23-27, 2018


				
			
		
	
