
	
	
		
IntroductionThe primary research effort within CTAS has been the design of a set of automation tools that make use of this trajectory prediction capability to assist the controller in overall management of traffic.The two criteria upon which success is judged are controller acceptance and improvement in traffic flow as measured by reduced delays and improved aircraft operating efficiencies.Because of the complexity of the air space system, the approach taken has been to adopt a "design a little, test a lot" philosophy with real-time simulation and field testing included as an integral part of the design process.Analysis of real-time data and fast-time simulation methods are used to extrapolate the results of the field tests.The purpose of this paper is to review the process used in the development of CTAS and provide examples of the role of real-time simulation, field testing, and fast-time simulation.The paper will first discuss the overall technical approach.To illustrate the approach, the FAST development will be reviewed.The DA tool is somewhat different from FAST in that it allows more strategic control.This has led to some differences in the DA development approach that will be discussed.
Technical ApproachThe overall technical approach is shown in figure 1.Instead of following the more traditional sequentialapproach, the requirements, design, simulation, and operational tests are conducted concurrently with a high level of interaction.Analysis of real-time simulation and live traffic data are used with fast-time simulation to quantify and extrapolate the performance of the system.A primary advantage of this approach is the involvement of controllers and pilots throughout the development.The research facility established to support this approach is illustrated in figure 2. The primary ATC simulation was developed at Ames.It includes an air traffic simulation using pseudo-pilots and an ATC facility simulation.Both are hosted on a network of workstations.
Analysis of Real-Time DataSo far, we have been discussing the development process.To understand whether the concept will provide benefit,techniques
DA DescriptionThe Descent Advisor is a set of automation tools to assist  Distance along predicted path, n.mi.  the better than 20 second delivery accuracy shown above to be achievable with DA, together with the benefits derivable with FAST and TMA are estimated to be in the order of $33M per year at the DFW airport.These data are being used by the FAA to develop a comprehensive assessment of the benefits achievable with CTAS.
Concluding RemarksBecause of the complexity of air traffic control, CTAS has been developed using a "design a little, test a lot" philosophy.Controllers and the piloting community have been involved in the design throughout the program.In the case of FAST, most operational issues could be adequately addressed through a combination of real-time simulation and shadow-mode testing.Operational tests are scheduled to begin this fall to validate the concept in real operations in anticipation of national deployment.In the case of DA, the total system performance is highly dependent on the compatibility between aircraft or pilot and controller procedures.Issues that will affect system performance include the adequacy of the aircraft and wind modeling, and the ability and willingness of the crew to follow DA advisories.This difference has led to a greater involvement by pilots throughout the design and the initiation of early and non-intrusive field evaluations.Asystem for the automated management and control of terminal area traffic to improve productivity, referred to as the Center-TRACON Automation System (CTAS), is being developed at NASA Ames Research Center under a joint program with the FAA (ref.I).CTAS consists of three types of integrated tools that provide computergenerated advisories for both en-route and terminal area controllers to manage and control arrival traffic efficiently.The first tool, the Traffic Management Advisor (TMA), generates runway assignments, landing sequences, and landing times for all arriving aircraft, including those originating from nearby feeder airports (ref.2).TMA also assists in runway configuration control and flow management.The second tool, the Descent Advisor (DA), generates clearances for the en-route controllers handling arrival flows to metering gates (ref.3).The DA's clearances ensure fuel-efficient and conflict free descents to the metering gates at specified crossing times.The third tool, the Final Approach Spacing Tool (FAST) provides terminal area controllers with heading and speed advisories to help produce an accurately spaced flow of aircraft onto the final approach course (ref.4).The underlying premise behind the design of CTAS has been that successful planning of traffic in capacity constrained airspace requires the ability to accurately predict future traffic situations.The technology for accurate prediction of trajectories was developed in the early 1970s and has been incorporated in modern flight management systems.Data bases consisting of several hundred aircraft performance models, airline preferred operational procedures and a three dimensional wind model support the trajectory prediction capabilities within CTAS.(This is discussed in ref. 7.)
Figure 4 .Figure 5 .Figure 6 .456Figure 4. FAST sequencing and scheduling.
for analyzing real-time data are required to assure that the system will perform as expected in the real-world and to assist in quantifying potential benefits through use with fast-time simulation.The real-time analysis conducted in support of CTAS is to be published this fall in an article by M. Ballin and H. Erzherger (ref. 1 I).Two examples of this analysis are included here.First is the method used to calculate the arrival time errors at the feeder-fix into the terminal area.Based on fast-time simulation, Erzberger and Neuman have shown that the magnitude of these errors directly affect the portion of total delay that should be absorbed in the terminal area or TRACON (refs.12 and 13).The second is the method used to measure inter-arrival spacing at the threshold for different aircraft combinations, i.e. heavy followed by heavy, large followed by small, etc.These data are necessary to understand the delay reduction potential of improved sequencing and spacing and runway assignment.
Figure 88Figure 8 shows a composite plot of flights into DFW taken over a 140 minute interval involving a major rush.A program has been developed to assist developers in analyzing these data (ref.14).The analysis program is constructed so that the CTAS estimated time of arrival (ETA) at the feeder fix, computed at any point along the trajectory, can be compared with the actual crossing time.The program is further refined so that a researcher can call up a specific trajectory to identify possible causes of any major error in the ETA.This tool has been invaluable in improving the overall robustness of the trajectory prediction algorithms.An example of the use of this tool for obtaining statistical data on ETA errors is shown in figure 9.It should be noted that the curve appears to be the superposition of two error sources, one with a Gaussian distribution and one with a Poisson distribution.If the Gaussian portion is attributed to errors in the ETA calculations where the flight is not affected by controller-induced delays and the Poisson portion is attributed to delays inserted to coordinate traffic flow, we can make a first order estimate of ETA accuracy achievable with an effective traffic management tool.
Figure l0 shows aFigurel0shows a composite plot of flights into the terminal area.Here it is much more difficult to automatically sort through the data to achieve meaningful statistical results regarding ETA's at the threshold or estimates of the inter-arrival spacing.The tool must ignore all aircraft that are not landing, and it must identify the most likely runway for each landing aircraft.The greater the number of mistakes, the less valid the analysis.Shown in figure I i is an example histogram of interarrival spacing for aircraft having a legal separation of 2.5 n. mi.The few cases where separations were less than 2.5 n. mi.do not imply violations.Under current rules, as soon as the pilot has the runway in view, the pilot can declare VFR.Again, the curve seems to be a superposition of a Gaussian and Poisson distribution.In this case, it is assumed that the Gaussian portion represents the controller precision in spacing aircraft onto the final approach path given a steady stream of traffic and the Poisson portion represents those pairs where there were natural gaps.From these data, we can infer the controller target point, the errors that can be expected about the target point, and the buffer that can be used to model the controller's behavior.The potential for improvement
Figure 9 .Figure 11 .911Figure 9. Histogram of ETA errors at meter fix.
figure 13.A DA test station was set up in the Traffic Management Unit of the Denver en-route center.The existing CTAS system that supports TMA at Denver was used.The DA advisories were transmitted to a test engineer located at the sector controller position.The test engineer passed the advisory to the sector controller in a written script.The sector controller then issued the advisory to the participating flight.An example of a DA advisory for an unequipped aircraft would be: "UAL 123, begin descent 70 miles from the Meeker VORTAC; descend at 280 knots; if unable advise."An example DA advisory for a FMS equipped aircraft would be: "UAL 123, descend at pilot's discretion, descend at 280 knots; if unable advise."The exact phraseology and procedures were carefully coordinated between the facility and United Airlines.Examples of the data collected are shown in figure14.Both horizontal and vertical profile data as well as ETA errors were recorded.The data shown are for an aircraft with an FMS and for an aircraft without an FMS.A summary of the accuracy achieved at the meter fix is shown in table1in the form of mean and root mean square (rms).In all cases the CTAS prediction was within 20 seconds.The FMS in the TSRV predicted crossing time is also shown for comparison.It should be noted that these data are based on a single DA clearance and a prediction approximately 15 minutes before the meter-fix crossing.
120Figure 14 .14Figure 14.Trajectory data collection.
Fast-time simulationsand analysis of real-time data are used to quantify the performance of the system and to provide a basis for extrapolating limited results from realtime simulation, shadow-mode testing, and limited field tests to a variety of cases in a statistically significant manner.Results to date indicate a tremendous operational benefit through the introduction of CTAS type automation tools.9.Brinton, C.R.:AnImplicit Enumeration Algorithm for Arrival Aircraft Scheduling.Proceedings of the 1 lth Digital Avionics Systems Conference, Seattle, Wash., Oct. 1992.10.Cooper, G. E.; and Harper, R. P.: The Use of Pilot Rating in the Evaluation of Aircraft Handling Qualities.NASA TN D-5153, 1969.11.Ballin, M. G.; and Erzberger, H.: An Analysis of Aircraft Landing Rates and Separations at Dallas/Ft.Worth Airport.To be published as a NASA TM, Fall 1995.12. Neuman, F.; and Erzberger, H.: Fast-Time Statistical Evaluation of Sequencing and Scheduling Algorithms for Two Runways.To be published as a NASA TM, Fall 1995.13.Erzberger, H.: Integrating Physical Models and Expert Knowledge in the Design of Automated Air Traffic Management Systems.AGARD Lecture Series No. 200, Knowledge Based Functions in Aerospace Systems, Nov. 1995.14.Neuman, F.; Erzberger, H.; and Schuellar, M. S.: CTAS Data Analysis Program.NASA TM-108842, Ames Research Center, 1994.15. Green S. M.; Vivona, R. A.; and Sanford, B.., Aug. 7-9, 1995.
APPROACH Each phase is viewed as a validation of previous stageDevelop DetailRequirementsI Conduct Detail Designl I Evaluate in SimulationI 'c°n uc' D tional Test Develop Detailed L Specifications for o Operational Build y M E I' NTTo study controller display integration issues, two terminal area radar displays (Fully Digital ARTS Display System, Time TRADITIONAL
CTASAPPROACH Take reduced capability system to the field as early as possible -design for continuous improvementDevelop RequirementsIIConduct DesignIEvaluate in SimulationConduct Operational TestDevelop Specificationsfor Operational SystemDEPLOYMENTDEPLOYMENTDEPLOYMENTDEPLOYMENTBUILD 1BUILD 2BUILD 3BUILD 4Figure 1. Programmatic approach.FDADS) are integrated into the network. To investigatespecific air-ground communicationand traffic manage-ment issues, links were establishedwith existing fullpiloted simulators located at the Ames and LangleyResearch Centers. To understand actual traffic situationsand to support shadowing evaluations,live radar con-nections were established,first with Denver Center andthen expanded to include the Fort Worth Center and theDallas/Fort Worth terminal area (TRACON). To under-stand weather and evaluate its effect on the trajectoryprediction capability of CTAS, connections were estab-lished to receive weather informationfor both the Denverand Dallas/Fort Worth areas. We are currently receiving"rapid update cycle" weather data. Field tests are underway at Denver and Dallas.Applicationto Developmentof FASTThe steps taken in the FAST development are illustratedin figure 3. Fast-time simulation,real-time simulation,and live traffic testing in shadow-modehave been usedthroughout the development (ref. 5).
Operational testing has been maintained as a target but has been delayed until the system design issues identified in simulation and,I\ involved throughout the process. Initial studies considered a generic airspace designed to evaluate basic con cepts. .......... I)As the program progressed, the effort addressed morerealistic environmentsbased on the Denver andAI If_.l.Dallas/Fort Worth areas.FAST DescriptionFAST is a tool for aiding the terminal area controller in S.LS31 9.LV CI:alVlAIOJLnV VV..-I£,I/CjVNsetting up the optimal landing sequence, selecting themost appropriate runway and providing the controllerwith turn and speed advisories to produce an accuratelyspaced flow of aircraft onto the final approach course(ref. 4). The sequence and runway advisors are referredto as "passive FAST." The turn and speed advisories arereferred to as "active FAST." Both passive and activeFAST advisories are based on trajectories that havebeen computed to be conflict free for the duration of theflight path. These trajectories and advisories are con-tinually updated based on new radar track data (every4.7 seconds) and on inference of controller intent. Moredetails on FAST are contained in references 4 and 6.The trajectory prediction computationsare reviewed inreference 7.shadow-modetesting are resolved. Controllers have been
Operational Development Progress Test of PreparationEnvironment_for OperationalEvaluation_-TestAdaptationAssessment TeamJfor TargetfSiteSystemInitialDevelopmentTeam (
SDT) Software On-site Controllers Analysis Shadowing Concept Definition Real-time Simulation v Engineers, Fast-time Slmulahon ID Human Factors, I_ Local Controllers T Phases of Controller Involvement Figure 3. FAST development process.As an exampleof the developmentprocess,we willreviewthe developmentsof the sequenceand schedulinglogic and the runwayallocationlogic.Sequencingand SchedulingAlgorithmThe sequencingand schedulingproblemaddressedwithin
FAST are illustrated in figure 4. In the initial design, the sequence and schedule were optimized to assure mini- mum delays based on separations at the threshold. The speed and turn advisories were computed to assure efficient and conflict free flight (ref. 8). To achieve minimum delays, the system would allow overtakes upstream in the traffic flow. As the simulation was adapted to be more representative of Denver and Dallas/ Fort Worth, it became apparent that additional sequence constraints would be required to allow the controller to maintain a coherent view of the traffic situation. This led to the development of a trajectoryis shownin figure 5. Withoutgoing into the details,thelogic for determiningwhetherto allow an overtakedependson the relativepositionof two aircraftscheduledfor the same segmentin the TRACON(i.e., downwind,final, etc.), their speed differences,and the potentialdelaysavings.If the trailingaircraftfalls above the curve infigure 5, it is rescheduled.Subsequentanalysisandfast-timesimulationhave shown that these additionalconstraintsimposea negligiblepenaltyon overallperformance.RunwayAllocationThe runwayallocationalgorithmhas evolvedfrom aninitial algorithmthat was designedto optimizea singlefunctional(ref. 9), to an algorithmthat is more consistentwith currentprocedures,providesimprovedcontrollerawareness,and allowsconsiderationof multipleperfor-segmentbasedmancemetrics(refs. 4 and 6). The currentmethodbeginsorderinglogic that under certain conditionswouldwith a nominalrunwayassignmentbased on publishedmaintainsequencesestablishedprior to merging on finalproceduresat the particularairport.A decisiontree is(refs. 4 and 6). The segmentbased ordering methodenteredwhich branchesthroughalternativerunways,allows the overtakeof one aircraft by another if there is aentry gate to the TRACON,aircrafttype, and finallyendssufficientreductionin delay but it restricts the conditionswith a minimumglobal delay reductionrequiredfor aunder which this reorderingmay occur. The logic for therunwaychange.The overall benefitdue to a runwayreorderingwas derived from over 2000 hours of real-timechangeis computedand comparedwith the predeter-simulationsinvolvingcontrollersfrom Dallas/FortWorth.mined minimumdelay reduction.If the delay reductionexceedsthe minimumdelay, the changeis made.It is imbeddedin the CTAS code in the form of fuzzy logic.An example of the resulting logic for a reordering
.......... Initial cruise........... _............. _._............ -....... /Vleter ...... i..................... i..................... !.................... !.................... ,. fix ES_TUS i ...L .......... i....... 350"'1" ........ ?.................... i ..................... i'"";'_'"'"i .................... i ............ "_"i ..................... ...... : .................. I,.{...._ ..................... i............................. condition ........... .........I................ ESTUS............ i.... .......................... I.i.................... i.................... i.................... i.........................................Conventional Example..2430. 45OTraffic Management CTAS Station UnitESTUS /4oo..I]!{,i'_{!i InitialcruiseA Zcondition_.......,_,[3ool ..]!f.."l_i::1'Radar[410320340360380400420\ 440'0......20i'''l'''l'''l''' 406080100120East, n.mi.Distance along predicted path, n.mi.DA test FMS Example I_"450DA test engineer__Radar Sector ESTUScommuncationsMeter fiiiiInitial cruiseS A @ Z43o.__Y _ UAL _ .,, I condition ..f:"/ aircraft <->ATC Normal VHF __i /_ ;redicted ] ,_!!_Or/ DRAK0 5 _[ ],a ,.=\ 35o..I 300..i :,: ,i ii i i:: i ......... i i :i '410320340360380400420440_/,". __ 2oo-_........ .,,_,.ey_---i ,, t,,,l,''l'''I.......... ................... _ ---, -.;..---; .... ' Radar..I ....... I'East, n.mi.020406080100ControllerD/_, sector oDserverFigure 13. DA test configuration."_ 2so4........ =t ............ _ .................... }.................. I--Predicted I............. 2ooJ........ __ ...................... i.................. t , ............. ......... Initial cru'se ............ :...................... ;.._ .............. /_! ................... i......... condition .......... ........... , .......... ii iiiiiiiiiiill .........
Table 1 .1Meter fix crossing time accuracy (seconds)TSRV aircraftUALaircraftGuidanceFMSCTASCTASmodepredictionpredictionpredictionAll8.8 mean,-2.3 mean,2.4 mean,10.5 rms12.5 rms13.1 rmsnon-FMS16.8 mean,1.7 mean,7.4 mean,9.4 rms10.0 rms14.3 rmsFMS4.9 mean,-6.3 mean,-2.5 mean,9.4 rms12.4 rms10.0 rmsAs previouslynoted, fast time analysis has indicated astrong relation between operationalbenefits and the accu-racy with which aircraft are delivered across the meter-fix. Based on a preliminaryextrapolationof this analysis,
		
		
			
August 1995Technical Memorandum
TITLE AND SUBTITLEThe Center-TRACON Automation System: Simulation and Field Testing
AUTHOR(S)Dallas G. Denery and Heinz Erzberger A new concept for air traffic management in the terminal area, implemented as the Center-TRACON Automation System, has been under development at NASA Ames in a cooperative program with the FAA since 1991.The development has been strongly influenced by concurrent simulation and field site evaluations.The role of simulation and field activities in the development process will be discussed.Results of recent simulation and field tests will be presented.
SUBJECT TERMS			
			

				


	
		Design of Center-TRACON Automation System. Proceedings of the AGARD Guidance and Control Panel 56th Symposium on Machine Intelligence in Air Traffic management
		
			HErzberger
		
		
			TJDavis
		
		
			SMGreen
		
		
			1993
			
			Berlin, Germany
		
	
	Erzberger, H.; Davis, T. J.; and Green, S. M.: Design of Center-TRACON Automation System. Pro- ceedings of the AGARD Guidance and Control Panel 56th Symposium on Machine Intelligence in Air Traffic management, Berlin, Germany, 1993, pp. 52-1-52-14.



	
		The Traffic Management Advisor
		
			WilliamNedell
		
		
			HeinzErzberger
		
		
			FrankNeuman
		
		10.23919/acc.1990.4790788
	
	
		1990 American Control Conference
		San Diego, Calif
		
			IEEE
			May 1990
		
	
	Nedell, W.; and Erzberger, H.: The Traffic Manage- ment Advisor. Proceedings of the American Control Conference, San Diego, Calif., May 1990.



	
		
			SMGreen
		
		Time-Based Operations in an Advanced ATC Environment
		
	
	Green, S. M.: Time-Based Operations in an Advanced ATC Environment.



	
		NASA CP-3090
		
			Conference
		
		
			Oct. 1989
			
			Virginia Beach, Va
		
	
	Conference, NASA CP-3090, Virginia Beach, Va., Oct. 1989, pp. 249-260.



	
		THE FINAL APPROACH SPACING TOOL
		
			TJDavis
		
		
			KJKrzeczowski
		
		
			CCBergh
		
		10.1016/b978-0-08-042238-1.50015-x
	
	
		Automatic Control in Aerospace 1994 (Aerospace Control '94)
		Palo Alto, Calif
		
			Elsevier
			Sept. 1994
			
		
	
	Davis, T. J.; Krzeczowski, K. J.; and Bergh, C. C.: The Final Approach Spacing Tool. Proceedings of the 13th IFAC Symposium on Automatic Control in Aerospace, Palo Alto, Calif., Sept. 1994.



	
		The Development of the Final Approach Spacing Tool (FAST): A Cooperative Controller-Engineer Design Approach
		
			KatharineKLee
		
		
			ThomasJDavis
		
		10.1016/s1474-6670(17)46729-2
	
	
		IFAC Proceedings Volumes
		IFAC Proceedings Volumes
		1474-6670
		
			28
			21
			
			Sept. 1995
			Elsevier BV
			Berlin, Germany
		
	
	Lee, K. K.; and Davis, T. J.: The Development of the Final Approach Spacing Tool (FAST): A Coop- erative Controller-Engineer Design Approach. Proceedings of the 14th IFAC Symposium on Automatic Control in Aerospace, Berlin, Germany, Sept. 1995.



	
		Knowledge-based scheduling of arrival aircraft in the terminal area
		
			KJKrzeczowski
		
		
			ThomasDavis
		
		
			HeinzErzberger
		
		
			IsraelLev-Ram
		
		
			ChristopherBergh
		
		10.2514/6.1995-3366
	
	
		Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference
		Baltimore, Md
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			Aug. 1995
		
	
	Krzeczowski, K. J.; Davis, T. J.; Erzberger, H.; Lev-Ram, I.; and Bergh, C. P.: Knowledge- Based Scheduling of Arrival Aircraft in the Terminal Area. Proceedings of the AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference, Baltimore, Md., Aug. 1995.



	
		Terminal area trajectory synthesis for air traffic control automation
		
			RASlattery
		
		10.1109/acc.1995.520941
	
	
		Proceedings of 1995 American Control Conference - ACC'95
		1995 American Control Conference - ACC'95
		
			American Autom Control Council
			June 1995
		
	
	Slattery, R. A.: Terminal Area Trajectory Synthesis for Air Traffic Control Automation. Conference Proceedings of the American Control Confer- ence, June 1995.



	
		Design and evaluation of an air traffic control Final Approach Spacing Tool
		
			ThomasJDavis
		
		
			HeinzErzberger
		
		
			StevenMGreen
		
		
			WilliamNedell
		
		10.2514/3.20721
	
	
		Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics
		Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics
		0731-5090
		1533-3884
		
			14
			4
			
			July-Aug. 1991
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA)
		
	
	Davis, T. J.; Erzberger, H.; Green, S. M.; and Nedell, W.: Design and Evaluation of an Air Traffic Control Final Approach Spacing Tool. Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics, vol. 14, no. 4, July-Aug. 1991, pp. 848-854.



	
		The effectiveness of visual aids in teaching foreign languages
		
			MUsmonov
		
		10.47689/linguistic-research-vol-iss1-pp233-235
		OMBNo. 0704-0188
	
	
		Zamonaviy lingvistik tadqiqotlar: xorijiy tajribalar, istiqbolli izlanishlar va tillarni o‘qitishning innovatsion usullari
		ZLTXTII
		2249-5959
		
			1
			
			20503
			inScience LLC
			Washington, DC
		
	
	Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188
	OMBNo. 0704-0188 Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collectionof information. Send comments regardingthis burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503.



	
		Information for CME Credit—Child Influenza Vaccination and Adult Work Loss: Reduced Sick Leave Use Only in Adults With Paid Sick Leave
		
			Agency
		
		
			Only
		
		10.1016/j.amepre.2018.12.001
	
	
		American Journal of Preventive Medicine
		American Journal of Preventive Medicine
		0749-3797
		
			56
			2
			A3
			
			Elsevier BV
		
	
	Leave blank
	AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank)



	
		Final Technical Report High Energy Physics at Belle and Belle II PI John Yelton, University of Florida Dates covered 06/01/2015 to 03/31/2016
		
			JohnYelton
		
		10.2172/1332870
	
	
		REPORT DATE 3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED
		
			Office of Scientific and Technical Information (OSTI)
			
		
	
	REPORT DATE 3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED


				
			
		
	
