
	
	
		
The study reported here was initiated by observations of condensation trails that occur behind transport aircraft at cruise altitudes under certain atmospheric conditions.The objective of the study reported is to explain why the structure of condensation trails behind aircraft at cruise altitudes differ in some respects from those predicted by classical theory for the roll-up of lift-generated vortex sheets.Because classical roll-up theory does not include the effect of jet-engine exhaust on wake structure, numerical simulations were carried out for the time-dependent interaction of jet-exhaust streams with lift-generated vortex distributions.The simulations indicate that inclusion of jet-exhaust effects produces results that more closely represent observed wakes than those calculated by means of classical roll-up theory.In particular, jet-exhaust streams appear to cause wakes to separate into several nearby parts so that the vertical depth of the wake is increased by over a factor of two.It is therefore recommended that wake-prediction methods include the effect of jet-exhaust streams during takeoff, climb and cruise.Current prediction methods for wake-hazardous regions during approach and landing at airports probably do not need to be changed because engine thrust is small during those operations.
NomenclatureL = lift coefficient = Lift/q ∞ S G o = Γ o /b o U ∞ Lift = ρ ∞ U ∞ |Γ o | b', lbs (N) q ∞ = ρ ∞ U ∞ 2 /2 S =
I. IntroductionThe lift-generated swirling motions in aircraft wakes brought about by the lift-generated trailing vortices are so strong that they usually dominate the organized across-trail velocity components in the wake.For this reason, theoretical and experimental studies of lift-generated vortex wakes have usually not included the effect of jet-exhaust streams on wake structure and on the spread or movement of the hazardous region posed by the vortices in the wake [1][2][3][4][5][6][7].To be sure that such a neglect was tolerable, a study was made of the effect of engine thrust on maximum measured wake-induced rolling moments on aircraft when they encounter the wakes of preceding aircraft [8].It was found that the measured maximum rolling moments in wakes where jet effects were present are smaller than when the wake-generating aircraft was in its approach configuration and gliding toward a landing.It was also found that the reduction in the maximum measured value for wake hazard brought about by engine thrust was far from sufficient to render wakes non-hazardous for in-trail penetration.For these reasons, classical roll-up theory was believed to be sufficiently accurate for the estimate of the maximum and the distribution of wake-induced rolling moments in lift-generated wakes of aircraft at cruise altitudes and in the airport environment [3][4][5][6][7][8][9][10].The study presented here was initiated by the observation that the structure of condensation trails # behind aircraft at cruise altitude have features not present in wakes predicted by classical roll-up theory for vortex wakes [1,2,9].The observations suggest that even though engine thrust does not alleviate wakes enough to render them harmless, the energy content in the jet-exhaust streams from the engines is large enough to produce significant distortions to wake structure through displacement and rearrangement of vortex elements brought about by turbulent mixing with the ambient air and by the deceleration of jet-exhaust streams as they age.The objective of the present study is to show how jet-engine exhaust streams appear to cause lift-generated vortex wakes to divide and become more complicated than predicted by classical theory.The study reported is directed at the determination of why the visual structure of condensation trails sometimes differs considerably from the structures predicted by classical roll-up theory for lift-generated vortex sheets [5,6].In order to accomplish these objectives, theoretical and observational information is provided to improve the understanding and prediction capability of the structure of lift-generated wakes of aircraft as they move and spread as a function of time under the influence of its vortex and engine-exhaust flow-field components.Pictures are first presented of condensation trails at cruise altitudes to illustrate the more complex appearance of lift-generated wakes at cruise altitudes where the effect of jet-exhaust streams on their structure is visualized.Classical roll-up theory is described to provide a background for cases wherein the flow-field structure is driven by only the vortex sheet shed by the wing, so that they do not separate into several parts that substantially increase wake size.Point-vortex and point-source representations along are then used to simulate the time-dependent motion of wakes at cruise altitudes in order to illustrate and explain some of the details of the interaction of vortex wakes and engine exhaust streams.It is assumed that the fluid motions studied can be treated by use of inviscid and incompressible flow theory.# Condensation trails appear behind aircraft when they fly at cruise altitudes, because the atmosphere at those altitudes is often at temperatures below -40 o F (or -40 o C), and a relative humidity above 40%.These conditions cause the water vapor in engine exhaust gases to condense and freeze into ice crystals before they have time to evaporate
II. Observations of Dynamics of Condensation Wakes.The photographs presented in Fig. 1 are part of a larger set taken at long range from the ground in order to study how the structure of vortex wakes at cruise altitudes changes with time, and how rapidly the hazardous parts of wakes spread as a function of time [1].At the time of the photographs, conditions at cruise altitudes were such that condensation and freezing of water vapor in engine exhaust products visualized the complete wake, and not just the high-speed vortex-core regions of the vortices [3,4].The photograph in Fig. 1a presents   grown by about a factor of five or more by mixing with the atmosphere and by sinuous mixing brought about in the wake by the long-wave instability as shown in Fig. 1c.It is also noted that the condensate first becomes most dense in the lower part of the wake (middle of Fig. 1b), and then becomes most dense in the upper part of the wake above where the long-wave instability has occurred; Fig. 1c.This change is believed to be brought about by the circulatory flow field of the vortex pair that tends to move condensate from the bottom of the wake to the top of it.Analysis of a large number of observations indicate that condensation trails spread roughly as the square root of time during their visual existence [1].An example of complete wake separation is shown in Fig. 2. The picture was taken from an aircraft flying beside and into the wake of another aircraft to make measurements of wake velocities [2].The objective of the flight tests was to evaluate potential hazards to aircraft that might accidentally penetrate a lift-generated wake.In the photograph, the formation of two distinct regions of wake fluid indicate that the wake has, in this case, divided into two parts that probably continue to aerodynamically communicate with each other.The lower part of the condensation trail contains a pair of vortex filaments clearly marked by condensation where the vortex pair is going through the development of the long-wave instability [3,4].The upper part appears to be a cloud of condensate without any organized structure or presence of an organized vortex pair.Also, a non-condensate vertical distance exists between the two parts of the wake.The upper region is some times referred to as the jet-wake part of the condensation trail, because it appears to consist primarily of engine exhaust, and the lower region as the vortex wake, because a pair of vortex cores undergoing the long-wave instability is prominent in that part of the wake.The foregoing photographs are typical of a number of cases observed in which condensation trails appear to divide into upper and lower parts that remain in touch with or near to each other during the lifetime of the wake.Not apparent in these photographs, but clear in enlarged views, is that the upper region does not exhibit any dominant vortex-like structures, but appears to be composed primarily of a large-scale turbulent flow field with eddies as large as or larger than the wing span of the wake-generating aircraft.The lower region appears to consist primarily of a pair of vortices that undergo the long-wave instability [1][2][3][4], and large turbulent eddies are not observed.As the vortex pair executes the wake dynamics associated with the long-wave instability, the amplitude of the waves on the filaments at the bottom of the condensate cloud becomes large enough to dominate wake motions, especially in the lower part of the trail.the way that the structure of lift-generated vortex wakes have usually been estimated in the past [9].Based on the span loading on the wake-generating wingand the model shown in Fig. 3, the magnitude of the swirl velocity distribution in the vortices can be accurately predicted [5,10].The prediction process assumes that the vortex sheet generated by the lift on the wing of the aircraft begins at z=0 and the x=0 station where the quarter chord of the wing is assumed to be located.Classical theory for roll-up of vortex sheets, Fig. 3, assumes that the upward component of the flow of the free stream around the wing is given by U ∞ sin α = w ∞ , where α is the angle of attack of the wing relative to zero lift for an elliptically loaded wing.The circulation bound in the wing is related to the span loading byγ(y,0) = -dΓ(y,0)/dy (1)The vortex sheet is assumed to initially be flat, and of zero thickness so that it has zero crosssectional area.When the vortex sheet rolls up continuously from its two side edges, it forms two well-organized vortices of opposite sign, as shown in Fig. 3, the roll-up process envelops and encloses a quantity of fluid to form an elliptically-shaped oval (the vortex oval) that has a finite cross-sectional area and travels downward with time.When the span loading on the wing is not elliptic, the structure of the vortex pair inside the oval still depends on the span loading on the wake-generating wing, and can therefore be estimated theoretically [5,10].The cross-sectional area associated with the vortex pair, when it is rolled up, is then a consequence of inviscid fluid dynamics and not a result of exhaust entrainment or turbulent mixing.Another theoretical model must and will be used to analyze the more complex flow fields associated with the development of lift-generated flow fields when jet-exhaust streams are present.The numerical method used to compute the more realistic flow fields to be presented also includes roll-up entrainment, but uses point-vortex elements to simulate the actions of the circulation in the shed wake, and point-source elements to simulate exhaust jet-streams to simulate deceleration, mixing and entrainment of jet-exhaust streams with ambient air.Other numerical examples of the time-dependent roll-up of vortex wakes are presented after the method used has been described.
IV. Trefftz-Plane Analysis of Wake Dynamics. A. Overview of Method.The computational method used to compute the time-dependent dynamics of lift-generated vortex wakes with and without the presence of jet-exhaust gases is made by use of point-vortex and point-source distributions in the so-called Trefftz plane [5,6,[11][12][13][14].The simulations begin immediately behind the aircraft where the initial locations of the singularities are known.The Trefftz-plane approximation simplifies the computations by use of the approximation that wakeinduced velocities are most important in the vertical and lateral directions, and negligible in the flight direction, so that their variations from the free-stream velocity can be ignored.The roll-up of vortex sheets can then be treated as a time-dependent, across-stream problem.As a consequence of the assumptions made, the technique does not represent three-dimensional instabilities, like the long-wave instability of a vortex pair [3,4].It is also assumed that the fluid is incompressible and inviscid.
B. Span-Wise Loadings Considered.Because measured span-wise loadings are not available for the aircraft that generate the condensation trails of interest, realistic estimates are needed as starting points for the computations to be carried out to estimate the observed wake behavior.Two idealized span loadings were chosen for the study because they shed vortex wakes that are representative of two kinds of span-wise loadings designed for aircraft in the past.They are: 1) elliptical span loading, derived by Munk [15,16] as the span loading that has the least lift-induced drag for a given lift and wing span; and, 2) a span loading designed by R. T. Jones [17] as the span loading that has the least lift-induced drag for a given lift and given minimum wing-root bending moment (i.e., least structural weight) (Fig. 4).The Jones-optimized design, RTJopt, is a combination of triangular and elliptical downwash distributions along the span of the wing.Although current designs resemble the span loading proposed by Jones, an exact match is not likely because high-speed computers are used to optimize the design of not only the wings, but also of the entire structure of the aircraft.In that way, interactions of the various components of the aircraft with each other are included in the computations used to optimize the design.As a result, the numerical solutions obtained for the span-wise loadings of lift on subsonic transports are no longer accurately represented by simple functions like those obtained by Munk and Jones.The Munk design [15,16] was chosen because it sheds a vortex sheet with circulation concentrated at the wingtip region, whereas the Jones design sheds circulation much more uniformly distributed along the span.An elliptically loaded wing has a span-wise loading given byΓ ell (y)/Γ o = (4/π )[1 -(2y/b o ) 2 ] 1/2 (2)where For the general case, the span-wise or lateral and vertical velocity components for the ith point vortex, as induced by a summation of the contributions of each jth point vortex are given by [5,6,[11][12][13]v i = -(1/2π) j =1 N ∑ γ j [(z i -z j )]/[(y i -y j ) 2 +(z i -z j ) 2 ] (4a)w i = +(1/2π) j =1 N ∑ γ j [(y i -y j )]/[(y i -y j ) 2 +(z i -z j ) 2 ] (4b)where, N is the number of point vortices used to represent the sub-divided vortex sheet, γ j is the circulation content of the jth point vortex, and v i and w i are the lateral and vertical velocity components of the ith vortex.The velocity, u i , in the flight or x-direction of the various point vortices (sheet segments), is assumed to be U ∞ relative to the aircraft, and stationary relative to the ambient air.In a flight situation, the along-axis movement of the vortex elements is in the same direction as the jet-engine exhaust, but is not as rapid.The influence of the jet streams first stretches the vortex cores, and then compresses them as the jet-exhaust streams decelerate.As the wake ages, the component of the velocities of the jet exhaust and vortex cores in the flight direction both tend toward zero relative to the ambient air.The effect of first being stretched and then compressed on vortex dynamics is assumed to be small, and is therefore ignored in the present study.In certain cases, the distribution of vorticity in the vortex sheet can be assumed to be perfectly symmetrical or anti-symmetrical about the centerline of the wake.For anti-symmetrical vortex wakes, which is the wing case, computational time can be saved by writing Eqs. ( 4) for the antisymmetrical case asv i = -(1/2π) j =1 N ∑ γ j {[(z i -z j )]/[(y i -y j ) 2 +(z i -z j ) 2 ] -[(z i -z j )]/[(y i + y j ) 2 +(z i -z j ) 2 ]} (5a) w i = +(1/2π) j =1 N ∑ γ j {[(y i -y j )]/[(y i -y j ) 2 +(z i -z j ) 2 ] -[(y i + y j )]/[(y i + y j ) 2 +(z i -z j ) 2 ]} (5b)where, v i =dy i /dt and w i =dz i /dt relate the magnitude of the velocity components to the changes in the time-dependent locations of the point vortices, (y i ,z i ).Equations ( 5) insure perfect antisymmetry of motion and save some computational time.Because the wakes are assumed to be perfectly anti-symmetrical, the quantity N is taken as the number of point vortices on one side of the wake, and not the total number of vortices in the flow field, 2N.In the integration for the time-dependent locations of the vortices, accumulation of computational errors are minimized by use of several techniques.First, the choice of the size of the maximum amount of circulation in each point vortex is controlled by the number of point vortices chosen to represent the vortex wake.The size of the time step, and the number of iterations on vortex motion, are also chosen by trial and error to be a size that makes the motion of the vortices orderly.In addition, when two vortices approach each other too closely, each point vortex is assumed to have a vortex core structure wherein the magnitude of the swirl velocity decreases linearly from that given by Eqs. ( 4) and ( 5) to zero at the center of the point vortex.The core radius is set equal to four initial spacings between the vortices.Therefore, when two vortices approach each other within a distance less than the chosen core radius, the swirl velocity magnitude induced by one vortex on another in the array is softened so that erratic vortex motions are suppressed.The lateral and vertical velocities induced on vortices in the array are then given byv i = -(1/2π) j =1 N ∑ γ j {[(z i -z j )]/[r c 2 ] -[(z i -z j )]/[(y i + y j ) 2 +(z i -z j ) 2 ]}(6a)w i = +(1/2π) j =1 N ∑ γ j {[(y i -y j )]/[r c 2 ] -[(y i + y j )]/[(y i + y j ) 2 +(z i -z j ) 2 ]} (6b)where, r c is the core radius (solid body rotation) given to each vortex structure.Eqs. ( 5) are used when the distance between the ith and jth vortices, [(y i -y j ) 2 +(z i -z j ) 2 ], is greater than or equal to r c , and Eqs. ( 6) are used when the distance between the two vortices is less than r c .These relationships help to prevent unrealistic excursions of point vortices whenever they pass closely to each other, and tend to assist in the formation of vortex cores, rather than dispersing them.The foregoing equations are made dimensionless by dividing the lateral v i and vertical w i velocity components by the flight velocity, U ∞ , of the wing through the atmosphere.In the computations, the time is made dimensionless by a grouping of parameters as T = t Γ o /b o 2 .The various quantities are also related to one another through the lift on the wing asLift = ρU ∞ |Γ o |b o(7)The time parameter is also related to the self-induced downward velocity of the vortex wake aircraft is related to the computational time byX(T) = x(t)/b o = t U ∞ /b o = T/(Γ o /b o U ∞ ) = T/G o (9)whereG o = Γ o /b o U ∞ is around 0.1 to 0.w pr = -|Γ o |/2πb o 'U ∞(11 )As shown in Fig. 5, the vortex sheet shed by an elliptically-loaded wing first descends at about the same speed all along the span except near the wingtips, where a strong up-wash occurs.In the wingtip region, the up-wash turns into a rotational motion brought about by the nearby vortices.In this way, vortex cores are produced that cause the vortex sheet to roll up from the wingtips inboard to the wake centerline, with somewhat concentrated cores at the two centers of the rollup.The left and right sides of the wake are mirror images of each other.In the beginning of the roll-up process, the RTJ loading produces a nearly triangular downwash pattern (e.g., x/b o = 1 and 2) over the outboard part of the wake, and an almost constant downwash over the inboard part of the span.As time progresses, the initial downwash patterns are replaced by the swirling flow fields of vortex pairs.The structure of the two swirling flow fields can be predicted with good accuracy by use of a method derived by Betz [5,6].After that, the structure of the rolled-up vortices changes very slowly with time until three-dimensional instabilities set in to cause the orderly structure of the vortex pair to decompose.The turbulent motions brought about in the wake by its decomposition cause the lift-generated flow field to spread further by turbulent decay [1].
B. Side Views of Wake Dynamics.Because the observer is usually on the ground and the condensation trails at cruise altitude, observations of wakes are made from a side-ways diagonal view towards the wake.The side views presented in Fig. 7 derived computationally then supplement the computationally derived end views of the wake dynamics shown in Figs. 5 and6.The numerically-generated lines in the figures represent the paths traveled by the point vortices as a function of downstream distance.The paths of the point vortices approximate vortex filaments as they trail downstream from the wing for about 100 span lengths (≈ 0.5 minute) of travel.In this way, the figures present the development of the vortex sheet from when it was shed to far downstream behind the wakegenerating wings.Also, the paths of the vortices for the RTJ loading appear to be more compact than those for elliptic loading.In addition, the larger circulation content and the more inboard loading of the RTJ vortex sheet causes it to descend a bit more rapidly than the vortex sheet shed by an elliptic-loaded wing.
VI. End Views of Motion of Point Vortices with Markers.In order to better understand the mechanisms that cause condensation trails to grow in crosssectional size from about one span to over five spans, a sequence of cases were calculated to for the cases computed because the summation of source strengths is then 1.0 per side for elliptic loading, which is about the same magnitude as a summation of strengths for the point vortices on each side of the wake.That is, because the number of point sources and point vortices are the same in number on each side of the wake (20), the summation in strengths for both yield total strengths around 1.0 dimensionless units.If the strength chosen for the point sources was smaller or varied with time, the influence of the sources on the flow field decreased to an amount that was too small.Similarly, if the strength chosen for the point sources was larger, the influence of the sources on the flow field became unreasonably dominant.For these reasons, the strength of the sources chosen for all of the cases was the 0.05 valued indicated above.The theoretical simulations presented indicate that the fluid added to the wakes by exhaust gases (simulated by point sources) remain near the altitude where they were generated and do not move downward nearly as fast as the vortex part of the wake, which moves downward under the self-induced velocity field of the vortices.Therefore, as wakes ages, it becomes composed of an upper (mostly condensation) part and a lower (mostly vortex) part, as observed at cruise altitudes.Also, the point vortices also appear to group into several groups of pairs rather than spiraling around each other in a single group.wake has probably become benign as far as a rolling-moment hazard is concerned for in-trail encounters.However, the vertical-loads hazard posed by the wake could still be too hazardous to permit across-trail penetrations [1].The three-vortex configuration in Fig. 11 is, of course, more conducive to decomposition than the classical single-pair configuration that forms when mixing and exhaust condensate are not present.
VIII. Conclusions.The computed simulations of lift-generated vortex wakes with and without exhaust condensate indicate that the presence of jet-exhaust streams in lift-generated wakes causes them to separate into two or more parts, similar to dynamics observed in condensation trails.The upper parts are composed primarily of condensate with some vorticity, and the lowest part contains the strongest parts of the vortex sheet which goes through the long-wave instability.Although the foregoing flow-field representations are approximate, they appear to simulate features frequently observed in condensation trails shed by aircraft flying at cruise altitudes.It is concluded that lift-generated vortex wakes spread more rapidly in the vertical direction when engine exhaust streams are present, than when they are absent.The calculations also indicate that the wake structures shed by different span loadings on the wake-generating wing are similar in size and shape, and have many of the same characteristics.Detailed differences are probably not important as far as wake hazard and decomposition rate are concerned.The results presented apply to wakes of aircraft at cruise altitudes, but probably also to aircraft in their take-off and climb configurations.The results are probably not needed, however, when engines are throttled down, as for approach and landing configurations near airports.Guidelines derived previously [7,18,19] for the motion and spread of vortex wakes for aircraft on approach to an airport are then correct as derived for avoiding vortex wakes of preceding aircraft, and need not be modified.The study did not determine the effect of jetexhaust streams on the decomposition and decay of lift-generated vortex wakes.IX.= wing aspect ratio b = wingspan, ft (m) b' = span-wise distance between vortex centers ≈ πb g /4, ft (m) C
planform area of wing, ft 2 (m 2 ) t = time, s T = tΓ o /b o 2 x = distance in flight or longitudinal direction, ft (m) X = x/b o = T/G o y, z = distance in lateral and vertical directions, ft (m) u, v, w = velocity components in x, y and z directions, ft/s (m/s) U ∞ = velocity of wake-generating aircraft, ft/s (m/s) Wt = weight, lbs (N) γ = -dΓ/dy Γ = circulation bound in wing, ft 2 /sec (m 2 /s) ρ = air density, slugs/ft 3 (kg/m 3 ) Subscripts ell = elliptical span-wise loading fil = vortex filament g = wake-generating aircraft lnk = linking of vortex pair lw = long-wave instability of vortex pair o = reference quantity oval= streamline oval that encloses vortex pair pln = plan view pr = vortex pair RTJ = R. T. Jones weight-optimized span loading ∞ = free-stream condition
to have separated into an upper and lower part, and the long-wave instability[3,4] has begun to grow.The sinuous waves associated with the long-wave instability are prominent in the lower part of the condensate as dense tubes of condensation.The tube-like formations are robust regions that form at the highspeed centers of rolled-up vortex sheets.As time progresses, the amplitude of the along-axis waves on the filaments become larger and more prominent until the vortices link across the centerline of the wake near the bottom of the condensate; Figs.1b and 1c.When linking occurs, the initial single and rather small condensate-marked region shown on the left side of Fig.1ahas or sublime.Under those conditions, exhaust condensate becomes a fluid marker of long duration that makes it possible to observe the dynamics of lift-generated vortex wakes over a wide range of conditions.
Fig. 11Fig.1 Time history of decomposition of lift-generated wakes as visualized by condensation of exhaust gases in stream from jet engines.
Fig. 22Fig.2Photograph taken from nearby aircraft of the condensation trail of a transport aircraft at cruise altitude.View along wake from behind shows wake separation into upper and lower parts.Upper part appears to not contain a pair of concentrated vortex cores, whereas lower part does contain a pair of intense vortex cores that are undergoing the long-wave instability[2][3][4].
Fig. 3 Oblique view of idealized theoretical model of roll up of vortex sheet shed by elliptically loaded wing into vortex oval [9].
Fig. 44Fig. 4 Span loadings on isolated wings to be used as basis for study of wakes.Total lift by each lifting distribution is the same so that Lift = ρU ∞ |Γ o |b o .
, Γ ell (y) is the span-wise distribution of circulation bound in the wing to represent the lift on an elliptically loaded wing of span b o that carries the same total lift, lift = ρ|Γ o |b o U ∞, as a wing with uniform loading, Γ o , and a span of b o .The second span loading to be used in the study is one of the family of designs produced by R. T. Jones[17].Each span-wise loading is optimized for minimum induced drag for a given lift, span and wing-root bending moment.Each wing-span used in the design then has a particular combination of a uniform and a triangular down-wash distributions at the trailing edge of the wing, which makes it more complex than the elliptic distribution.The span loading used here is written in closed form asΓ RTJ (y)/Γ o = [(12/π +6 Yp)/ (b RTJ /b o )] [1 -(2y/b RTJ ) 2 ] 1/2 + {(18Yp -24/π )(4y 2 /b RTJ 2 ) ln[(b RTJ /2y) + ((b RTJ /2y) 2 ] 1/2 }/(b RTJ /2y)(2)where b RTJ /b o = 1.15 is the particular span ratio recommended by Jones[17] as most practical and assumed for the weight-optimized design used in the present study.The quantity Γ RTJ (y) is the span-wise distribution of bound circulation in the wing.The quantity Yp is defined as Yp = 4b o /(3πb RTJ ).C. Computational Method.The initial span-wise distribution of circulation in the vortex sheet shed by the wing at the moment the aircraft passes through a vertical plane at the trailing edge of the wing yields the initial distribution of vorticity in the vortex sheet as, γ(y,0) = -dΓ(y,0)/dy (3) where, Γ(y,0) is the magnitude of the bound circulation in the wing as a function of span-wise distance.The beginning structure of the vortex sheet is used as the initial conditions for the subsequent time-dependent motion of segments of the vortex sheet.Segments of the vortex sheet are obtained by dividing the vortex sheet into span-wise segments of equal length so that the vortices are equally spaced, but they do not all have the same circulation content.The centers of the point vortices are located at the centers of the segments of vortex sheet they represent, which results in a step-wise representation of the span-wise variation in the circulation bound in the wing and of the strength of the vortex sheet shed at the trailing edge of the wing.The time-wise development of the vortex sheet in the plane where the computations are being made moves away from the trailing-edge of the wake-generating aircraft at the flight velocity, U ∞ , so that it remains with the same body of fluid during the event.In this way, the two-dimensioanl timedependent computations produce a representation of the three-dimensional structure of the wake.
o = b o π/4 and Γ o /b o U ∞ = 2C Lg /πAR g .Because C Lg ≈ 1.0 during cruise flight, and AR g ≈ 7 for subsonic transports, the distance in span lengths, x/b o , behind the wake-generating
2 .2In the figures to follow, G o will be assumed to be 0.2 for simplicity, and for compactness.The distance behind the wake-generating aircraft is then related to the dimensionless time by x/b o ≈ 10 T (10) V. Motion of Point-Vortex Representations. A. End Views of Wake Dynamics.By use of the computational method described previously, rear views of the point-vortex representations of the two vortex wakes being studied are presented in Figs. 5 and 6 at several different times during the early part of the roll-up process.The vortex sheet shed by the elliptic span-loading model is divided into 20 point vortices per side (40 point vortices total).Because the span of the wing used for the R. T. Jones loading is 1.15 times larger than the one used for elliptic loading, its vortex sheet was divided into 23 segments (46 point vortices total).The larger number of segments is required so that the spacing between vortices is the same for both models, as is the total lift.Elliptic span loading is studied first, because it is the most familiar of those used to design aircraft wings (Fig. 5).The locations of the point vortices in Figs. 5 and 6 are connected by lines at each downstream station to more clearly identify the shape of the vortex sheet at a given time.The vortex sheets are assumed to be flat at the beginning of each event.Roll up of each sheet as represented by point-vortex distributions indicates the status of the sheet shape as it changes from a flat surface into a pair of fully-developed nearly round vortices.The roll-up process causes the initially flat vortex sheet to envelop enough ambient fluid to fill an elliptically-shaped cross-sectional area of over about two spans in width and 3 1/2 in depth.The final vortex oval contains all of the circulation (point vortices) in the wake and moves downward at a velocity given by
Figure 77Figure 7 displays the changes in wake structure as a function of time during the roll-up process along with the smaller changes that occur at larger distances behind the wing.The figures illustrate how the individual vortex elements orbit about a central core region where the centroids of vorticity (or circulation) are located.The filament motions indicate that wake separations or multiple vortex pairs, do not form for these two configurations.The motion of the two vortex sheets differs most at the beginning of the roll-up process where the time at which the outermost vortices take longer to be rolled into the vortex structure for elliptic loading than for the RTJ loading.
Fig. 77Fig. 7 Side view of the long-term roll up process of the vortex sheets shed by the two span wise loadings on a wing.
Fig. 88Fig. 8 End views of locations of point vortices ( ) and passive fluid markers ( ) at several times during history of wake dynamics for 25 span lengths.
Fig. 99Fig. 9 Dynamics predicted for lift-generated wakes shed by elliptically-loaded wing as represented by point vortices and sources to simulate affect of exhaust products and turbulent mixing on wake structure.
Fig. 10 Fig. 11 .1011Fig. 10 Dynamics predicted for lift-generated wakes shed by wing loaded according to R. J. Jones design for minimum weight as represented by point vortices and sources to simulate affect of exhaust products and turbulent mixing on wake structure.
Fig. 1111Fig. 11 Side view of condensation trail about one and one-half minutes old showing decomposed configuration of lowest vortex pair at bottom of condensate, and core regions of two possible vortex pairs near the top and near the center of the upper part of the condensate trail.

		
		
			

				


	
		Overview of Wake-Vortex Hazards During Cruise
		
			VJRossow
		
		
			KDJames
		
	
	
		AIAA Journal of Aircraft
		
			37
			6
			
			2000
		
	
	Rossow, V. J., and James, K. D., "Overview of Wake-Vortex Hazards During Cruise", AIAA Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 37, No. 6, 2000, pp. 960-975.



	
		Wake Vortex Core Flow Field Dynamics and Encounter Loads In-situ Flight Measurements
		
			APBrown
		
		
			MBastian
		
		AIAA 2008-0468
	
	
		46 th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit
		Reno, NV
		
			7-10 January 2008
		
	
	Brown, A. P., and Bastian, M., "Wake Vortex Core Flow Field Dynamics and Encounter Loads In-situ Flight Measurements", 46 th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, 7-10 January 2008, AIAA 2008-0468.



	
		Stability Theory for a Pair of Trailing Vortices
		
			SCCrow
		
	
	
		AIAA Journal
		
			8
			12
			
			Dec. 1970
		
	
	Crow, S. C., "Stability Theory for a Pair of Trailing Vortices", AIAA Journal, Vol. 8, No. 12, Dec. 1970, pp 2172-2179.



	
		Lifespan of Trailing Vortices in a Turbulent Atmosphere
		
			SCCrow
		
		
			ERBate
		
		
			Jr
		
	
	
		AIAA Journal of Aircraft
		
			13
			7
			
			July 1976
		
	
	Crow, S. C., and Bate, E. R., Jr., "Lifespan of Trailing Vortices in a Turbulent Atmosphere", AIAA Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 13, No. 7, July 1976, pp 476-482.



	
		Lift-Generated Vortex Wakes of Subsonic Transport Aircraft
		
			VJRossow
		
	
	
		Progress in Aerospace Sciences
		
			35
			6
			
			Aug. 1999
		
	
	Rossow, V. J., "Lift-Generated Vortex Wakes of Subsonic Transport Aircraft", Progress in Aerospace Sciences, Vol. 35, No. 6, Aug. 1999, pp. 507-660.



	
		Vortex Wakes of Conventional Aircraft
		
			CDonaldson
		
		
			Dup
		
		
			AJBilanin
		
		
			May 1975
		
		
			Advisory Group for Aerospace Research and Development
		
	
	AGARDograph No. 204
	Donaldson, C. duP., and Bilanin, A. J., "Vortex Wakes of Conventional Aircraft", Advisory Group for Aerospace Research and Development, AGARDograph No. 204, May 1975.



	
		Guidelines for Avoiding Vortex Wakes During Use of Closely-Spaced Parallel Runways
		
			VJRossow
		
		
			LAMeyn
		
		AIAA 2008-6907
	
	
		26 th AIAA Applied Aerodynamics Conference
		Honolulu, HI
		
			18-21 Aug. 2008
		
	
	Rossow, V. J,, and Meyn, L. A., "Guidelines for Avoiding Vortex Wakes During Use of Closely-Spaced Parallel Runways", 26 th AIAA Applied Aerodynamics Conference, Honolulu, HI, 18-21 Aug. 2008, AIAA 2008-6907.



	
		Thrust-Augmented Vortex Attenuation
		
			JCPatterson
		
		
			FLJordan
		
		
			Jr
		
	
	
		NASA Symposium on Wake Vortex Minimization, NASA SP-409
		
			AGessow
		
		
			1976
			
		
	
	Patterson, J. C., and Jordan, F. L., Jr., "Thrust-Augmented Vortex Attenuation", Gessow, A., ed., NASA Symposium on Wake Vortex Minimization, NASA SP-409, 1976, pp. 251-270.



	
		Classical Wing Theory and the Downward Velocity of Vortex Wakes
		
			VJRossow
		
	
	
		AIAA Journal of Aircraft
		
			43
			2
			
			March-April 2006
		
	
	Rossow, V. J., "Classical Wing Theory and the Downward Velocity of Vortex Wakes", AIAA Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 43, No. 2, March-April 2006, pp. 381-385.



	
		Extended-Betz Methods for Rollup of Vortex Sheets
		
			VJRossow
		
	
	
		AIAA Journal of Aircraft
		
			34
			5
			
			Sept.-Oct, 1997
		
	
	Rossow, V. J., "Extended-Betz Methods for Rollup of Vortex Sheets", AIAA Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 34, No. 5, Sept.-Oct, 1997, pp.592-599.



	
		
		
			SirLamb
		
		
			Horace
		
		
			Hydrodynamics
		
		
			1945
			Dover
			
		
	
	6th edition
	Lamb, Sir Horace, Hydrodynamics, 6th edition, Dover, 1945, pp. 214-230.



	
		The Formation of Vortices from a Surface of Discontinuity
		
			LRosenhead
		
	
	
		Proceedings of the Royal Society
		
			134
			
			1931
			London
		
	
	Rosenhead, L., "The Formation of Vortices from a Surface of Discontinuity," Proceedings of the Royal Society, London, Vol. A134, 1931, pp. 170-192.



	
		The Rolling Up of the Surface of Discontinuity Behind an Aerofoil of Finite Span
		
			FLWestwater
		
	
	
		Aeronautical Research Council
		
			1692
			
			1935
			London
		
	
	Repts. and Memo
	Westwater, F. L., "The Rolling Up of the Surface of Discontinuity Behind an Aerofoil of Finite Span", Aeronautical Research Council, London, Repts. and Memo. 1692, 1935, pp.116- 131.



	
		Application of Vortex Invariants to Roll Up of Vortex Pairs
		
			VJRossow
		
	
	
		AIAA Journal of Aircraft
		
			41
			5
			
			Sept.-Oct. 2004
		
	
	Rossow, V. J., "Application of Vortex Invariants to Roll Up of Vortex Pairs", AIAA Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 41, No. 5, Sept.-Oct. 2004, pp. 1098-1105.



	
		
			HGlauert
		
		The Elements of Aerofoil and Airscrew Theory
		Cambridge, England
		
			Cambridge University Press
			1948
			155
		
	
	Second Edition
	Glauert, H., The Elements of Aerofoil and Airscrew Theory, Second Edition, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1948, p. 155.



	
		
			MMMunk
		
		Fundamentals of Fluid Dynamics for Aircraft Designers
		New York, NY
		
			The Ronald Press Co
			1929
			94
		
	
	Munk, M. M., Fundamentals of Fluid Dynamics for Aircraft Designers, The Ronald Press Co., New York, NY, 1929, pp. 94ff.



	
		The Spanwise Distribution of Lift for Minimum Induced Drag of Wings Having a Given Lift and a Given Bending Moment
		
			RTJones
		
	
	
		NASA TM X-3334
		
			2249. Dec. 1950. Feb. 1976
			
		
		
			NACA Technical Note
		
	
	Collected Works of Robert T. Jones
	Jones, R. T., "The Spanwise Distribution of Lift for Minimum Induced Drag of Wings Having a Given Lift and a Given Bending Moment", NACA Technical Note 2249, Dec. 1950; see also, "Collected Works of Robert T. Jones", NASA TM X-3334, Feb. 1976, pp. 539-554.



	
		Guidelines for Flight Deck Procedures for Very Closely Spaced Parallel Runway Approaches
		
			SVerma
		
		
			SLozito
		
		
			GTrot
		
		
			DBallinger
		
	
	
		27th Digital Avionics Systems Conference
		
			October 26-30, 2008
		
	
	Verma, S., Lozito, S., Trot, G., and Ballinger, D., "Guidelines for Flight Deck Procedures for Very Closely Spaced Parallel Runway Approaches", 27th Digital Avionics Systems Conference, October 26-30, 2008.



	
		Preliminary Guidelines on Flight Deck Procedures for Very Closely Spaced Parallel Runway Approaches
		
			SVerma
		
		
			SLozito
		
		
			GTrot
		
		ICAS 2008-574-Verma-7-01-08
	
	
		16 th International Congress of the Aeronautical Sciences
		
	
	Verma, S., Lozito, S., Trot, G., "Preliminary Guidelines on Flight Deck Procedures for Very Closely Spaced Parallel Runway Approaches", 16 th International Congress of the Aeronautical Sciences, ICAS 2008-574-Verma-7-01-08.


				
			
		
	
