
	
	
		
I. IntroductionAirport configurations have a large impact on many components of the air traffic management system.A specific airport configuration determines which arrival and departure runways are active at a given time, under certain operating conditions, and the available airport capacity.Accurate predictions of future airport configuration reduce airport capacity uncertainty, which enable traffic flow management to better match demand to capacity.Both surface and airspace operations can benefit from better understanding future airport configurations.For example, taxi times are highly dependent on the active runways.Better knowledge of which runways will be active ahead of time enables more accurate predictions of taxi times and better utilization of resources on the airport surface.Recent research approaches have developed two main classes of models for airport configuration selection, prescriptive and predictive models.The prescriptive models aim at recommending the optimal configuration, taking into account the operational constraints [1,2].Authors in [1] formulated two optimization models for the runway configuration management problem that take into account the uncertainties in weather conditions and the loss of capacity during the configuration switch.On the other side, predictive models use and analyze the historical data to provide a better prediction for the airport configurations.H. Hesselink et al. developed a model for determining the most probable runway combination that will be used for the following 24 hours using probabilistic weather forecast information [3].S. Houston et al. used a binomial logistic regression approach to develop a predictive model of runway configuration selection.They used a limited number of variables including weather conditions, time of the year, and time of the day to compute probabilities for each runway configuration and then select the configuration with the highest probability of occurring in a specific time period [4].J. Avery et al. extended the discrete choice modeling approach and developed a data-driven model that provides a probabilistic forecast of the runway configurations in 15-minute intervals extended out to 3 hours.Their approach uses the air traffic controller's utility functions that would best describe the observed decisions [5].However, most of these modeling approaches were probabilistic approaches that used a limited number of variables and were applied to a limited number of airports.In addition to these probabilistic approaches, other ML approaches were used for runway configuration prediction.Md Shohel Ahmed et al. proposed an approach that uses traffic and weather data to train and test different classes of Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) (i.e., feed-forward back-propagation, recurrent back-propagation) to predict runway configurations [6].The major part of their proposed approach was in the prepossessing of the traffic and weather data, in addition to the feature scaling.In research related to airport configuration prediction, J. Jones et al. [7] proposed an approach for estimating the airport arrival rate (AAR) based on the environmental conditions within the terminal.For this, they developed a time-lagged prediction model that uses the weather forecast, flight schedules, and conditions its predictions on the estimates of the previous airport states.In our research, we leveraged the idea of using the time-lagged model to predict the airport configuration.This is done by taking the configuration predicted at the previous time step as an input to our model, combined with other input features.A main difference between previous research and our proposed approach is the usage of real time data in our framework.Additionally, we placed special emphasis on building a framework that facilitates training and deployment of models across many airports by leveraging state of art machine learning practices.Therefore, our framework allows for easy deployment of new airports and integration into a real time system.The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section II describes the ML approach used to predict the airport configuration.Section III includes a description of the data that is used to develop and evaluate the approach.The features input to the ML model are described in Section IV.The experimental design and the results are presented in Section V. Finally, conclusions and future work are summarized in Section VI.
II. Proposed ApproachRecursive multi-step forecasting is a known time series forecasting technique [8].It involves running a one-step model multiple times, where the prediction from the prior time step is used as input to generate the prediction for the following time step.When predicting airport configuration, the airport configuration predicted at the prior time step is used as input in the following time step, and in the first step the value is set to the current configuration.The approach is depicted in Fig. 1.Three parameters need to be defined in this approach: the step size, the overall prediction look ahead time, and the look ahead time of the prediction model running in each iteration/step.In the work presented in this paper we evaluated different values of the parameters and selected: 30 minutes as the step size, 6 hours as overall prediction look ahead time and 3 hours as model look ahead.The selected parameters lead to 12 prediction steps, and 6 steps in the model look ahead running in each step.One of the key advantages of the proposed approach in the context of airport configuration prediction is the stability Fig. 1 Recursive Multi-step Forecasting.Here is the number of steps in the model look ahead, is the number of steps in the prediction look ahead, is the target variable, and , is the feature vector with feature data from time step to time step . of the predictions.Configuration changes are not frequent, typically a few times a day.Having the prior configuration value as input helps the model to learn to propagate the current configuration unless there is clear evidence in the input features of the need of a different configuration.Within the multi-step forecasting approach, a variety of ML models can be used to predict the airport configuration at each step.In this work we evaluated a Random Forest classifier, and a XGBoost classifier.The Random Forest classifier builds multiple independent decision trees based on the features and merges them together to get a more accurate and stable prediction [9].Whereas the XGBoost classifier also combines decision trees, it starts the combining process at the beginning, instead of at the end [10].
III. DataOur goal was not only to develop a state of art airport configuration prediction model, but also to build a framework to facilitate training models across many airports and deploying them in a real time system.For that reason, real time availability was required for all input data sources, as described in this section.
A. Weather ForecastWeather is one of the key drivers of airport configuration.Tail winds or crosswinds can have a significant impact on runway operations and active configuration.Inclement weather can also affect configuration and capacity, e.g.closing of an arrival fix.In the work presented in this paper weather data is obtained from Localized Aviation MOS Program (LAMP).The products in the LAMP system are updated hourly and are valid over a 25-hour period, and are provided for major US airports.In this work we evaluated the following products:• Wind Speed, Wind Direction and Wind Gust: Wind speed and direction are important factors in determining airport configuration.The operational status of the runways is affected by the presence of strong crosswinds and tailwinds [11].Also, wind gust, if present, can significantly affect the terminal airspace capacity.• Cloud Ceiling and Visibility: The cloud ceiling and the visibility at the airport influence the choice of runway configuration.Both runway operations, as well as capacity, are affected by low visibility conditions.• Temperature, Lightning probability and Precipitation: Temperature, inclement weather, presence of wet or icy conditions also affects the runways capacity (e.g., affecting the taxi time duration), and hence affects configuration utilization [12].
B. Future Arrival/Departure CountsThe active airport configuration needs to provide enough capacity to accommodate departure and arrival flights.Consequently, we need to estimate future traffic to predict the airport configuration.In this effort, we leverage landing time predictions selected from physics-based landing time predictions available in FAA System Wide Information Management (SWIM) data feeds for each flight.Following a data-driven approach, we analyzed Traffic Flow Management (TFM) estimated time of arrivals (ETAs), Time-Based Flow Management (TBFM) ETAs and TBFM scheduled time of arrivals (STAs) and defined a set of rules to select the most accurate ETA at the different phases of flight.For example, TBFM ETA accuracy is poor prior to departure, being outperformed by TFM ETA.The obtained physics-based ETAs are used to calculate future arrival counts input to our model.A detailed description of the logic can be found in [13].Departure counts are obtained using Traffic Flow Management System (TFMS) departure times estimate.As an example, Fig 2 shows two weeks of arrival counts for Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport (DFW).
C. Airport ConfigurationHistorical airport configuration values were obtained from Data-link Automatic Terminal Information Service (D-ATIS) messages.The messages specify the active arrival and departure configurations over time.The airport configuration defines our target variable and the current configuration feature.Due to the large number of airport configurations identified in the D-ATIS data for some airports (e.g over 90 different runway sets for DFW ), we kept only major airport configurations by removing those configurations that were active for less than 1 % of the time.We also removed time periods with stale configurations, defined as those with no D-ATIS updates for at least 2 hours.This typically happens at overnight hours.Accordingly, we dropped the data rows related to the removed configurations throughout the whole time period.Fig 3 shows the DFW configurations' total hours per day of the week for 5 months, after applying filtering of the configurations.Out of a 90 configurations set, only 13 configurations with their associated data were used after applying the filtering rules.
IV. FeaturesTable 1 summarizes the features input to our ML model at each step.It includes the data described in the previous section and the additional features defined below.
A. Time of DayThe airport traffic changes with time of day.During the night time, the traffic will be lower than the day time.This can lead to some configurations being more likely to be active at a certain time of day.Environmental effects, e.g.noise, can also dictate the airport configuration at a specific time of the day.For these reasons, we included the time of day as a feature in our model.
B. Look ahead timeIn our recursive multi-step model, we need to feed the lookahead time for the current step as a feature.This feature helps the model to understand how the uncertainty evolves for different lookahead times and provides a more accurate prediction.
C. Airport configuration encoderAs described in section II, the current configuration feature is only fed to the first step model as a categorical feature and also encoded as a numerical vector.Airport runways are numbered according to compass bearings [14].This allow us to easily encode the current runway configuration as the average departure runway bearing, average arrival runway bearing and total number of departure and arrival runways.For example, for the configuration D_17R_18L_A_17C_17R_18L_18R (indicating departure runways 17R and 18L and arrival runways 17C, 17R, 18L, and 18R), the encoder will consist of 4 fields (17.5, 2, 17.5, 4), being 17.5 the average departure runway bearing, 2 the number of active departure runways, 17.5 the average arrival runway bearing, and 4 the number of active arrival runways respectively.The advantage of encoding the current configuration as a numeric vector is that it helps the model to understand which configurations are similar in the encoded space and establish a notion of distance in the ML model.
Feature
V. Experimental Design and Results
A. Model Performance on 2019 dataIn this section we review the performance of the airport configuration prediction model for six selected airports: Charlotte Douglas International Airport (CLT), DFW, John F. Kennedy International Airport(JFK), Newark Liberty International Airport(EWR), Dallas Love Field Airport (DAL) and LaGuardia Airport (LGA) .The results in this section were obtained for 5 months of data, August to December 2019.We selected 80% of the data for training and 20% for testing.To avoid correlation and data leakage between training and test data points, we split the data on a weekly basis, such that the testing data contains 4 full weeks (20% of the dataset).We tested two different ML algorithms for the ML model component in Fig. 1, Random Forest and XGBoost.The results in Fig. 4 are for XGBoost, which led to better model performance as shown in Fig 6.The models for CLT and DFW were obtained for the configurations shown in Table A.1, extracted from D-ATIS data.As previously mentioned, the configuration data was cleaned by removing rare configurations with very few data points; i.e. we kept only configurations that were active at least 1% of the time.The model performance is compared with a baseline which assumes no changes in the configuration.Consequently, the baseline propagates the current configuration up to 6 hours ahead.The model accuracy is measured as the percentage of prediction time steps (i.e 30-minute intervals), in which the predicted configuration matches the actual configuration.Fig. 5a shows the accuracy for the CLT model vs the baseline as a function of the planning horizon.We can see that the baseline and model perform similarly for a short planning horizon, but for a longer planning horizon the ML model outperforms the baseline.At 3 hours ahead, the difference between baseline and the ML model is 9%, for 6 hours ahead the difference increases to 17%.A similar analysis was performed for DFW, JFK, EWR, LGA and DAL.Figs.5b to 5f show the prediction accuracy of the ML models vs the baseline on the testing set for these additional airports..For DFW, the model and baseline started performing similarly for 1 hour ahead, and then the model started to outperform the baseline by 9% 2 hours ahead, 13% 3 hours ahead, and 31% 6 hours ahead.For JFK, EWR and DAL airports, the model performance is closer to the baseline and the model outperforms the baseline after a longer planning horizon.For DAL airport, the model didn't perform better than the baseline at any point of time.A summary of the prediction model accuracy results for the 6 airports for 3 and 6 hours lookahead time can be found in Figs 4a and4b respectively.Overall, the results show that our model outperforms the baseline for most airports, but different operating conditions at different airports affect how much performance lift the proposed model provides.To gain additional insights and better understand the difference in model performance across the selected airports, we identified the most important features for each of the models.Through the evaluations done over the six airports, for most of the airports it was noticed that the traffic (i.e, arrival and departure counts), along with the time of the day and wind are the most important features deriving the predictions.However, for DAL airport, it was noticed that traffic features are not within the most important features, meaning that traffic is not driving the predicted configurations, as it is the case with the other airports.The time of the day as well as the wind features (wind direction, wind speed) are the key features for DAL.We believe that the reason why our model was unable to perform better than the baseline for DAL is the lack of predictive power of the traffic features, and the existence of other external factors driving the active configuration in DAL and not included in our model.Fig A .2a,A.2b , show the most important features for DFW and DAL airports.Given the poor performance of the model for DAL airport, we conducted some initial analysis to study the interactions between DAL and DFW.We found that the flow in the two airports are in sync, but the configurations within the flow seemed to be independent.Further study is needed to better understand initial findings.
B. Model Performance on 2020 dataWe also evaluated the performance of the airport configuration prediction model for five selected airports using August to December 2020 data.We studied the effect of the pandemic, i.e. how the change in traffic levels can affect the performance of the prediction model.The following subsections review the performance of the model for DFW, DAL and North East Corridor (NEC) airports (JFK, EWR and LGA).
Model Performance on DFW and DAL airportsFigs.7a,7b and Figs.A.3a, A.3b show the model prediction accuracy along with the feature importance for DFW and DAL airports respectively.The feature importance values are calculated based on the information gain provided by each feature when training the XGBoost trees [15].A significant change in the feature importance for DFW for 2020  LGA airports respectively.As with DFW airport, it was clear that JFK and EWR traffic was also affected by the pandemic, which lead to the decrease in the performance of the model.For LGA airport, the traffic features were not within the most important features in either 2019 and 2020 data, meaning that traffic is not driving the predicted configuration.Thus, the performance of the model for LGA for both years was nearly the same.We also performed an analysis in order to study how changes in the configuration in one of the airports can affect others, and the main factors influencing the chosen airport configuration.The goal was to better understand interactions among the NEC airports, and how the insights could be used to improve the developed prediction models for these and other airports in the New York area.Figs.9a, 9b show the correlation matrices for JFK, EWR and LGA This representation provides a more clear notion of flow, and aggregates some of the underlying configurations.As expected, the results show that wind direction is an important factor driving airport configuration.It was found that LGA was mostly using runways 13 and 22 when JFK was using runway 22.In addition, the use of runway 22 at EWR is frequently corresponding to the use of 22 at JFK.These configurations are used for southern wind conditions.Similarly, the use of the runway 4 at EWR corresponds to the use of runways 31 and 4 for JFK, which would be used for northern winds.We also reviewed the sequence of configuration changes to better understand if any of the airports is driving configuration changes at others airports.However, the results were inconclusive, we did not find any strong relationships for our current data set.These are preliminary results, more study will be conducted to better understand interactions in future steps.
VI. ConclusionIn this paper, a multi-step machine learning approach is proposed for predicting airport configuration.The approach guarantees stability of the predicted configuration by taking as input the configuration predicted at the previous time step.The performance of the proposed model was tested and validated on six major US airports, spanning data from both 2019 and 2020.We compared the model's performance for both years to evaluate how the change in traffic levels in 2020 due to the pandemic affects the performance of the prediction model.It was clear that traffic counts, time of the day, and wind speed and direction features were the most important features affecting airport configurations changes.The proposed model performed better on 2019 data than on 2020, due to the decrease in the effect of traffic features because of the pandemic.The results presented in this paper demonstrate the value of the proposed approach.The proposed baseline was consistently outperformed as the prediction horizon increases.An important aspect of the proposed framework is the real time nature of the data, and the implementation using state of art machine learningFig. 22Fig. 2 Arrival counts for two weeks for DFW
(a) 3 FigFig. 535Fig. 4 Baseline vs Prediction Accuracy
Fig. 66Fig. 6 Random Forest Vs XGBoost model prediction accuracy for DFW airport
Fig. 77Fig. 7 Model accuracy Vs Baseline for 2020 Data
Fig. 8 NEC8Fig. 8 NEC Model accuracy Vs Baseline for 2020 Data
Fig. 99Fig. 9 NY airports configuration correlation matrix

Table 1 ML Model input features and Description1Data typeDescriptionTime of the dayDatetimeHour of the dayTemperatureNumericSurface temperature forecast value for each step in the model look ahead windowWind directionNumericWind direction forecast value in degrees for each step in the model look ahead windowWind speedNumericWind direction forecast value in degrees for each step in the model look ahead windowWind gustNumeric10-meter wind gust forecast value in knots for each step in the model look ahead windowCloud ceilingNumericCeiling height categorical value in knots for each step in the model look ahead windowCloudCategoricalTotal sky cover value in knots for each step in the model look ahead windowVisibilityNumericVisibility value for each step in the model look ahead windowLighteningCategoricalProbability of lightning value for each step in the model look ahead windowPrecipitationBooleanProbability of precipitation value for each step in the model look ahead windowCurrent airport configurationCategorical, NumericAn airport configuration encoder that captures the average runway number, along with the number of active runways in each configurationArrival countNumericNumber of future airport arrivals for each step in the model look ahead windowDeparture countNumericNumber of future airport departures for each step in the model look ahead windowLook ahead timeNumericLook ahead time for current step
		
		

			
AcknowledgmentsThe authors gratefully acknowledge funding for this work from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) as part of the Airspace Technology Demonstration 2 (ATD-2) project.
			

			

				


	
		Optimization Models for Strategic Runway Configuration Management
		
			CAProvan
		
		
			SCAtkins
		
		10.2514/6.2010-9149
		
	
	
		10th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations (ATIO) Conference
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			2010
		
	
	Provan, C. A., and Atkins, S. C., Optimization models for strategic runway configuration management under weather uncertainty, 2010. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2010-9149, URL https://arc.aiaa.org/doi/abs/10.2514/6.2010-9149.



	
		Optimal Selection of Airport Runway Configurations
		
			DimitrisBertsimas
		
		
			MichaelFrankovich
		
		
			AmedeoOdoni
		
		10.1287/opre.1110.0956
		
	
	
		Operations Research
		Operations Research
		0030-364X
		1526-5463
		
			59
			6
			
			2011
			Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS)
		
	
	Bertsimas, D., Frankovich, M., and Odoni, A., "Optimal Selection of Airport Runway Configurations," Oper. Res., Vol. 59, No. 6, 2011, p. 1407-1419. https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.1110.0956, URL https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.1110.0956.



	
		Probabilistic 2-Day Forecast of Runway Use
		
			HHHesselink
		
		
			JNibourg
		
	
	
		Proceedings of Ninth USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar (ATM2011)
		Ninth USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar (ATM2011)
		
			2011
		
	
	Hesselink, H. H., and Nibourg, J., "Probabilistic 2-Day Forecast of Runway Use," Proceedings of Ninth USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar (ATM2011), 2011.



	
		TR News March-April 2013: Deploying Transportation Research: TRB 92nd Annual Meeting Highlights
		10.17226/22582
	
	
		Transportation Research Board (TRB) Annual Meeting
		
			Transportation Research Board
			2012
			
		
	
	Houston, S., and Murphy, D., "Predicting runway configurations at airports," Transportation Research Board (TRB) Annual Meeting, 2012, pp. 12-3682.



	
		Data-Driven Modeling and Prediction of the Process for Selecting Runway Configurations
		
			JacobAvery
		
		
			HamsaBalakrishnan
		
		10.3141/2600-01
		
	
	
		Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board
		Transportation Research Record
		0361-1981
		2169-4052
		
			2600
			1
			
			2016
			SAGE Publications
		
	
	Avery, J., and Balakrishnan, H., "Data-Driven Modeling and Prediction of the Process for Selecting Runway Configurations," Transportation Research Record, Vol. 2600, No. 1, 2016, pp. 1-11. https://doi.org/10.3141/2600-01, URL https://doi.org/10. 3141/2600-01.



	
		A Cooperative Co-Evolutionary Optimisation Model for Best-Fit Aircraft Sequence and Feasible Runway Configuration in a Multi-Runway Airport
		
			MdAhmed
		
		
			SameerAlam
		
		
			MichaelBarlow
		
		10.3390/aerospace5030085
	
	
		Aerospace
		Aerospace
		2226-4310
		
			5
			3
			85
			2018
			MDPI AG
			Castelldefels, Spain
		
	
	Ahmed, M. S., Alam, S., and Barlow, M., "A Multi-Layer Artificial Neural Network Approach for Runway Configuration Prediction," Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Research in Air Transportation (ICRAT 2018), Castelldefels, Spain, 2018.



	
		Predicting & Quantifying Risk in Airport Capacity Profile Selection for Air Traffic Management
		
			JCJones
		
		
			RDelaura
		
		
			MLPawlak
		
		
			STroxel
		
		
			NUnderhill
		
	
	
		Proceedings of 14th USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar
		14th USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development SeminarSeattle, USA
		
			2017. 2017
		
	
	Jones, J. C., DeLaura, R., Pawlak, M. L., Troxel, S., and Underhill, N., "Predicting & Quantifying Risk in Airport Capacity Profile Selection for Air Traffic Management," Proceedings of 14th USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar (ATM2017), Seattle, USA, 2017.



	
		Multistep-Ahead Time Series Prediction
		
			HaibinCheng
		
		
			Pang-NingTan
		
		
			JingGao
		
		
			JerryScripps
		
		10.1007/11731139_89
	
	
		Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
		
			W.-KNg
		
		
			MKitsuregawa
		
		
			JLi
		
		
			KChang
		
		Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg
		
			Springer Berlin Heidelberg
			2006
			
		
	
	Cheng, H., Tan, P.-N., Gao, J., and Scripps, J., "Multistep-Ahead Time Series Prediction," Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, edited by W.-K. Ng, M. Kitsuregawa, J. Li, and K. Chang, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 765-774.



	
		Random Forests
		
			LeoBreiman
		
		10.1023/a:1010933404324
		
	
	
		Machine Learning
		0885-6125
		
			45
			1
			
			2001
			Springer Science and Business Media LLC
		
	
	Breiman, L., "Random Forests," Machine Learning, Vol. 45, 2001, pp. 5-32. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1010933404324, URL https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1010933404324.



	
		XGBoost
		
			TianqiChen
		
		
			CarlosGuestrin
		
		10.1145/2939672.2939785
		
	
	
		Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
		the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
		
			ACM
			2016
		
	
	Chen, T., and Guestrin, C., "XGBoost," Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2016. https://doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939785, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939785.



	
		Airport Capacity Prediction with Explicit Consideration of Weather Forecast Uncertainty
		
			RafalKicinger
		
		
			Jit-TatChen
		
		
			MatthiasSteiner
		
		
			JamesPinto
		
		10.2514/1.d0017
		
	
	
		Journal of Air Transportation
		Journal of Air Transportation
		2380-9450
		
			24
			1
			
			2016
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA)
		
	
	Kicinger, R., Chen, J.-T., Steiner, M., and Pinto, J., "Airport Capacity Prediction with Explicit Consideration of Weather Forecast Uncertainty," Journal of Air Transportation, Vol. 24, 2016, pp. 18-28. https://doi.org/10.2514/1.D0017.



	
		Probabilistic forecasting of airport capacity
		
			GeorgeHunter
		
		10.1109/dasc.2010.5655497
		
	
	
		29th Digital Avionics Systems Conference
		
			IEEE
			2010
			
		
	
	Hunter, G., "Probabilistic forecasting of airport capacity," 2010, pp. 2.A.3-1. https://doi.org/10.1109/DASC.2010.5655497.



	
		A Machine Learning Approach to Predict Aircraft Landing Times using Mediated Predictions from Existing Systems
		
			DanielWesely
		
		
			AndrewChurchill
		
		
			JohnSlough
		
		
			WilliamJCoupe
		
		10.2514/6.2021-2402
	
	
		AIAA AVIATION 2021 FORUM
		Washington, DC, USA
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			2021
		
	
	Wesely, D., Churchill, A., Slough, J., and Coupe, W. J., "A Machine Learning Approach to Predict Aircraft Landing Times using Mediated Predictions from Existing Systems," Submitted to AIAA AVIATION Forum, Washington, DC, USA, 2021.



	
		Substantial Near-Field Air Quality Improvements at a General Aviation Airport Following a Runway Shortening
		10.1021/acs.est.1c06765.s001
		
		
			2017
			American Chemical Society (ACS)
		
	
	"Airport Runway Names Shift with Magnetic Field," 2017. URL https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/news/airport-runway-names-shift- magnetic-field.



	
		XGBoost
		
			TianqiChen
		
		
			CarlosGuestrin
		
		10.1145/2939672.2939785
		
	
	
		Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
		the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data MiningNew York, NY, USA
		
			ACM
			2016
			
		
	
	"XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System," Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2016, p. 785-794. https://doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939785, URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939785.


				
			
		
	
