
	
	
		
Nomenclature
I. IntroductionSuccessful development and validation of performance standards for Detect and Avoid (DAA) Systems serve as a crucial step for the integration of Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) operations in the National Airspace System (NAS).A DAA system provides alerts and guidance to keep a UAS "Well Clear" of other aircraft. 1,2 ][10] The RTCA Special Committee 228 (SC-228) Working Group I recently finished its Phase I work at the end of 2016, and it is in the process of publishing the Minimum Operational Performance Standards (MOPS) for DAA systems.This Phase I MOPS targets UAS capable of carrying large and highpower sensor systems for operations in non-terminal areas.UAS in this category will be equipped with surveillance systems including Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B) in, airborne active surveillance, an air-to-air radar, as well as a DAA tracker that processes surveillance data.Phase II work for extending the MOPS to additional UAS categories and operations is underway.The DAA Well Clear (DWC) zone for the UAS targeted in the Phase I MOPS is defined by thresholds of three parameters.It does not have distinct physical boundaries because the definition depends on two aircraft's relative position and velocity during an encounter.Figure 1  zontal Miss Distance (HMD) represents the two aircraft's predicted minimum horizontal distance during an encounter assuming constant velocities (see Appendix A for a mathematical definition).The parameter h represents the two aircraft's current altitude difference.The time metric modified tau, τ mod , is an estimated time taken for the two aircraft to get horizontally close to each other (to be discussed in great detail below).The thresholds, denoted by an asterisk, for the HMD, h, and τ mod are 4000 ft, 450 ft, and 35 sec, respectively.All three parameters must simultaneously fall below their respective thresholds during an encounter for the two aircraft to violate the DWC.Alerting algorithms are designed to reduce the probability of violating DWC to a value required by the MOPS.The MOPS describes alerting requirements in terms of probabilities and test vectors without dictating a specific alerting algorithm.Prior research to inform the MOPS defined raw alerts using the same definitions as the DWC but with larger thresholds to provide buffers for surveillance uncertainties. 5he definition of τ mod is 2τ mod =    -r 2 -D mod 2 r ṙ , r > D mod , 0, r ≤ D mod (1)where r and ṙ are the horizontal range and range rate between the intruding aircraft (referred to as the intruder) and the UAS (referred to as the ownship), respectively.The range rate is negative for closing geometries.The positive incremental distance modifier D mod defines the radius of a "protection" disk around the ownship such that any intruder with a horizontal range less than D mod is always considered "urgent".In this case, τ mod = 0.The time metric τ mod , however, has certain limiting properties:• It does not correspond to the time of any physical event.• It is nonlinear with time, especially in the vicinity of the D mod disk (see Section III for an example).• During a multi-intruder encounter, τ mod cannot be directly used to prioritize intruders.The time metric τ mod has been used by the Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) II equipped by many manned aircraft. 11TCAS II is an optional component for the UAS targeted in Phase I MOPS.Nonetheless, interoperability between a DAA system and TCAS II has been a driving force in defining the Phase I MOPS.Ideally, a DWC zone should enclose TCAS's alerting zone for its resolution advisory.Because of this consideration, one argument for using τ mod for the DAA DWC is for potential better interoperability with TCAS II.The choice of τ mod , however, turns out to have minimal effects due to additional differences in TCAS II and DAA's alerting logic such as the following:1. TCAS II does not use the HMD consistently in its alerting logic; and 2. TCAS II's τ mod is based on 3-D range and range rates whereas the τ mod defined for a DAA system is based on horizontal range and range rate.Another argument for using τ mod for DAA systems is that the range-based τ mod avoids bearing measurements and its large measurement error.The bearing measurement errors are large in the active surveillance used by TCAS and, therefore, τ mod is a good choice for TCAS.However, for the DAA system, The bearing measurement error is much less of an issue since the DAA system considered by the MOPS will use ADS-B and an air-to-air radar, which both provide ten times more accurate bearing measurements than the active surveillance used by TCAS.This paper proposes a new, alternative horizontal time metric, the Time to Protected Zone, denoted by t pz .This metric has three advantages over τ mod : it corresponds to a physical event, it is linear with time, and it can be used directly in prioritizing intruders during a multi-intruder encounter.For alerting purposes, the protected zone is extended to be a function of surveillance sensor measurement errors, or surveillance errors.Since the time metric t pz utilizes bearing measurements and, therefore, it may be too sensitive to bearing measurement errors to be effective for alerting.To quantify sensitivities to surveillance errors, simulations of 972 encounters are conducted using two sensitivity metrics to compare τ mod and t pz .The parameters of the encounters are organized into an encounter test matrix.The surveillance sensor errors are modeled by Honeywell's sensor models and proprietary sensor fusion tracker. 12he paper is organized as follows.Section II supplies additional background information and describes the definition of t pz .Section III discusses issues about using τ mod that can be overcome by t pz .Section IV defines the sensitivity criteria for the time metrics.Section V describes the encounter test matrix and the simulation setup.Section VI presents results and discussions.Section VII concludes the paper.
II. Time to Protected Zone
II.A. BackgroundThe development of the MOPS for DAA systems uses a time metric to evaluate the horizontal separation between two aircraft.A fast-approaching intruder 8 nmi away may pose a more urgent threat than a slowapproaching intruder 3 nmi away.With a time metric threshold, the DWC does not have a fixed, physical volume; rather it is a function of the intruder's relative horizontal position and velocity.The time window considered by a DAA system covers up to 3 minutes before the aircraft reach their minimum horizontal separation.A commonly used time metric for pilots' situation awareness and intruder prioritization is the time to the Closest Point of Approach (CPA), denoted as t cpa .This time metric corresponds to a physical event and it is linear with time.However, t cpa underestimates the urgency of an encounter when the intruder and ownship are flying almost parallel trajectories at close range.The metric τ mod mitigates this problem by introducing a disk around the ownship with a radius of D mod .Any intruder within the D mod disk results in zero τ mod and it is always considered an urgent threat.However, τ mod does not correspond to any physical event.Also, τ mod is non-linear with time, especially near the D mod disk.With such behaviors, τ mod cannot be used to prioritize intruders by any criteria (See Section III).A time metric called the Time to Entry Point has been proposed as the predicted time for the intruder to reach the D mod disk. 13,14 ny intruder inside the D mod disk has a zero Time to Entry Point.This time metric maintains the advantages of both t cpa and τ mod and avoids their disadvantages.The Time to Entry Point is left undefined if the intruder is not predicted to enter the D mod disk, i.e., its HMD is greater than D mod .
II.B. DefinitionThis work proposes the Time to Protected Zone, t pz , which extends the Time to Entry Point metric in the following aspects:• The metric t pz is defined as the time to reach a protected around the ownship that does not necessarily take the shape of a disk.• When used for evaluating alerts, the dimensions of the protected zone can be made a function of the surveillance errors of each intruder.• The metric t pz is set to t cpa when the intruder is not predicted to enter the protected zone.This provides an alerting algorithm with a continuous definition of time metric when the projected intruder trajectory moves in and out of the protected zone in real time.Figure 2 demonstrates the definition of the protected zone at any time during an encounter.Consider a relative horizontal reference frame with two aircraft flying in a closing geometry.Without loss of generality, the ownship is placed at the origin of this reference frame.The axes, x and ŷ, are chosen such that the intruder's horizontal velocity vector relative to the ownship, ṙ, points along the negative direction of the ŷ axis.The intruder's relative horizontal position vector from the ownship is denoted by r.This convention of axes is called the collision plane. 15,16 he ownship's true ground heading is not used for choosing the direction of the axes.In this reference frame, the intruder's distance from the ŷ axis is always equal to the HMD.There is flexibility in the choice of the shape and dimensions of the protected zone.Its dimensions can be made to depend on individual intruders' surveillance errors for improved alerting performance.The example protected zone in Figure 2 consists of a disk with radius R 0 and an additional buffer zone shown in blue.The boundary of the protected zone is shown in bold.For brevity, only the right-half plane enclosing the intruder is shown in Figure 2 as the protected zone is symmetric about the ŷ axis.The additional buffer zone in blue is meant to accommodate HMD errors arising from surveillance errors.The metric t pz is defined as the time to reach the protected zone, or the time to reach the bold curve shown in Figure 2. If the intruder's HMD projects outside the protected zone, t pz is defined to be the time to reach the horizontal x axis, i.e., t pz = t cpa outside the protected zone.This definition ensures a smooth change of t pz upon change of an intruder's HMD.With this definition of a protected zone, it follows naturally that, when defining alert criteria, the HMD threshold, denoted as HMD * , should be consistently set to the edge of the protected zone.Let the surface of the protected zone be described by y = f (x).The function y is chosen such that it is symmetric with respect to x, i.e., f (x) = f (-x), where f (x) ≥ 0. Without loss of generality, consider a case in which the x component of the intruder's r is positive.By definition of the reference frame, x = HMD.Therefore, an intruder will be predicted to reach the protected zone at (HMD, y).Since y is the intersection of the the intruder's predicted trajectory with the protected zone, it is also the distance the intruder must fly to reach the CPA.Therefore,t pz = max 0, t cpa - y |ṙ| .(2)Note that t cpa -y | ṙ| < 0 if the intruder is already within the protected zone.The time metric t cpa can be viewed as a special case of t pz , for which the protected zone is defined to have zero area, i.e., y = 0 for every x.
II.C. Dimensions of the Protected ZoneIn this paper, the surface, or boundary, of the protected zone is defined with the following function:x = R 0 2 -y 2 + 1 - y R 0 ∆ H , 0 < y ≤ R 0 and |x| ≤ R 0 + ∆ H (3a) 0 = y, |x| > R 0 + ∆ H (3b)With this choice, the protected zone includes a R 0 disk and an additional buffer outside the disk that increases linearly as y approaches the x axis, reaching ∆ H at y = 0.This parameter ∆ H is user-selected and controls the size of the additional buffer zone.Solving for y in terms of x,y =      1 1+ ∆ H R 0 2 -∆ H R0 (x -∆ H ) 2 + -(x -∆ H ) 2 + R 0 2 + ∆ H 2 , when |x| ≤ R 0 + ∆ H , 0 , when x > R 0 + ∆ H(4)
II.D. Comparison of Time MetricsAll three time metrics described above, τ mod , t pz , and t cpa , are symmetric, 17 meaning their values are preserved upon switching the ownship and the intruder's states.Table 1 compares and contrasts the properties of the three time metrics.
III. Limitations of Modified TauFigure 3 shows the progression of τ mod , t pz , and t cpa during a hypothetical encounter.In this encounter, two aircraft fly at constant velocities with a relative speed of 450 kts (closing) and an HMD of 2000 ft.The  The Phase I MOPS defines the DWC using a τ mod = 35 sec.An issue with using τ mod for the DWC is that the non-linearity of τ mod adds complexity to an alerting algorithm.For example, very often an alerting algorithm would use the predicted time to a violation of the DWC.Consider a co-altitude, head-on encounter in which two aircraft have zero altitude difference and zero HMD.Suppose the two aircraft's current τ mod is 70 sec, the predicted time for the two aircraft to violate the DWC, however, is not 35 sec into the future.In fact, it must be computed by solving a quadratic equation using τ mod = 35 sec in Eq. 1.Using t pz would avoid this complexity.If the DWC uses a t pz * = 35 sec, then current value of 70 sec t pz would mean a predicted loss of DWC 35 seconds into the future.For alerting, τ mod also has limitations.Since t cpa and t pz correspond to distinct physical events, they can be used directly for prioritizing intruders.The time metric τ mod , on the other hand, cannot be used for this purpose.Figure 4 illustrates a hypothetical encounter involving three non-accelerating intruders with varying relative horizontal speeds and initial values of t cpa .All three intruders have HMD = 0.Here v ≡ |ṙ| denotes the magnitude of an intruder's relative velocity vector.The intruders' initial ranges are v × t cpa .Therefore, intruders (labeled as Intr in the figure) 1, 2, and 3's initial ranges are 1.18, 1.78, and 10.42 nmi, respectively.Without loss of generality, the encounter begins at t = 0 sec.Recall that a higher time metric value indicates a lower threat.Intruder 1 (Intr 1) has the smallest relative speed v = 50 kts and the largest intial t cpa , t cpa = 85 sec.Intruder 1 is predicted by t cpa to be the least threat.On the other hand, τ mod predicts intruder 1 to be the highest threat.One may argue that the time to the D mod disk serves as a better time metric than t cpa for prioritizing  intruders.To test this, consider a protected zone defined by a disk with a radius of D mod with no additional buffer zone. Figure 5 illustrates another hypothetical encounter involving three non-accelerating intruders (different from the previous encounter).All three intruders have HMD = 0. Intruders (labeled as Intr in the figure) 4, 5, and 6's initial ranges are 1.04, 2.67, and 11.81 nmi, respectively.Compared to t pz , τ mod predicts the opposite threat level priorities at the start of the encounter, or time zero.Intruder 4 (Intr 4) has the smallest t pz yet has the largest τ mod 104 sec.Moreover, in this encounter, the intruders' threat level priorities change with time as the τ mod curves intersect.This may be undesirable as it may cause a DAA system's directive guidance to reverse direction during a DAA maneuver.
IV. Sensitivity to Surveillance ErrorsAlthough t pz has advantages over τ mod , its explicit dependency on aircraft velocities makes it likely to be more sensitive to surveillance errors.Fluctuating values of a time metric around the DAA system's alert threshold are undesirable as it may cause the alert type to vary back and forth, posing challenges in providing a stable, consistent alert display to UAS pilots.Inaccurate values of a time metric may advance or delay the onset of an alert and impact the performance of the DAA system.Two metrics are defined in this work to measure the sensitivities of t pz and τ mod to surveillance errors:• Probability of reversal of a time metric during the progression of an non-accelerating encounter, P r • Average absolute error of a time metric as a result of surveillance errors, |∆| avg Both metrics are equal to zero in the absence of surveillance errors and increase with the magnitude of surveillance errors.
V. Simulations of EncountersThe sensitivities of the time metrics t pz and τ mod to the DAA system's surveillance sensor errors are compared by analyzing a set of simulated encounters with varying geometry, speeds, and surveillance equipage.The metric t cpa is not considered here due to its lack of a protected zone.The DAA simulation system uses true trajectories of the intruder and ownship to compute the true relative trajectories between the aircraft, the simulated surveillance sensor measurements, and the intruder track statistics estimated from the simulated surveillance sensor measurements.The sensor errors are simulated using Honeywell's high fidelity surveillance sensor models and the intruders' tracks are estimated using Honeywell's DAA tracking system.The Honeywell DAA tracker is a sub-TRL6 (Technology readiness level 6) tracker that is in its own iterative development cycle.This is one instantiation of the tracker with expected improvements in later versions to meet the developing DAA requirements and help with better alerting and guidance performance.The data are then collected and used to compute the time metrics and perform subsequent time metric sensitivity analysis.A total of 972 encounters are simulated; the parameters are summarized in the encounter test matrix (see Table 4 in Section VI).
V.A. DAA Simulation SystemFigure 6 shows a block diagram of the DAA simulation system.A trajectory generator is used to create the intruder, ownship, and relative intruder trajectories corresponding to the encounters defined in the encounter test matrix.The ownship trajectory is sent to the Ownship Navigation System block where the trajectory is used to provide outputs corresponding to an onboard navigation system.The intruder, ownship, and relative intruder trajectories are sent to the Surveillance Sensor Models block where sensor models are used to simulate ADS-B, Mode-S, Mode-C, and air-to-air radar measurements.The surveillance sensor measurements are sent to the Honeywell Tracking System (HTS).The HTS resolves the surveillance sensor measurements into a common reference frame, uses the H-Fuze system to estimate the track statistics of the intruder relative to the ownship, and computes additional track kinematic statistics required for DAA systems.Finally, the intruder, ownship, and relative intruder trajectories, the ownship navigation solution, and the estimated intruder track statistics are sent to the Time Metric Analysis block for time metric sensitivity analysis.The HTS is a multi-intruder aircraft, multi-sensor fusion system that estimates the track statistics of intruders relative to the ownship. 12The HTS fuses the measurements and statistical information from surveillance sensors in one framework to track intruder aircraft in three dimensions.The HTS features the H-Fuze system that performs Data Association, Track Management, and State (or Track) Estimation of surveillance sensors including ADS-B, TCAS, air-to-air radar, optical systems, and ground based radar.In this encounter trade study, the HTS uses a set of surveillance sensors that includes ADS-B, active surveillance of Mode-S and Mode-C, and air-to-air radar to track intruders.In general, ADS-B sensors provide accurate latitude and longitude measurements and accurate North-South and East-West velocity measurements.Active surveillance sensors provide accurate range measurements, noisy bearing measurements and no velocity measurements.Air-to-air radar provides range measurements with comparable accuracy to active surveillance range measurements and bearing measurements more accurate than active surveillance bearing measurements.Furthermore, air-to-air radar provides North-South and East-West velocity measurements less accurate than ADS-B.Table 2 summarizes the key surveillance sensor parameters used in the encounter trade studies.Note that these parameters were tuned and verified using flight test data. 18,19 he sensor's fields of view are specified using maximum range (R), bearing (B), and elevation (E).The bearing is defined with respect the line pointed to by the ownship's nose (right is positive).The sensors position errors are specified using latitude, longitude, and altitude for ADS-B; range and bearing for Mode-S and Mode-C; and range, bearing, and elevation for air-to-air radar.The sensor's velocity errors are specified using North (N), East (E), and A related consideration is the HMD threshold.For an alerting algorithm that uses an HMD threshold, it seems logical to define an HMD threshold at the edge of the protected zone at y = 0.If the protected zone incorporates the HMD in the buffer zone and the HMD threshold is defined appropriately, then the alerting algorithm can provide consistent raw alerts during the progression of an encounter that would lead to a loss of DWC.The choice of the protected zone, as well as the HMD threshold, plays an important factor in a trade-off between missed/late alerts and false alerts.A conceptually attractive approach is to allow a dynamic protected zone that is a function of the aircraft's estimated tracks as well as surveillance errors.However, in this approach, t pz would no longer be linear with time, and the dimensions of the buffer zone would be a function of encounter geometry and additional sensor parameters.Therefore, estimated tracks are not considered here for defining the protected zone.This work defines the protected zone such that most of the HMD fluctuations due to surveillance errors during an encounter that would lead to loss of DWC fall within the protected zone.To do so, the HMD error for an intruder is estimated at a characteristic range, R c , from the ownship, with a characteristic intruder closure rate, v c .Honeywell sensor model parameters are used for estimating the HMD error.The protected zone is defined by choosing ∆ H to be the estimated HMD error.For ADS-B, the HMD error arising from range measurement error is independent of range (i.e., a constant error).The HMD error arising from velocity measurement error is proportional to range.σ H, ADS-B 2 ≈ σ p. ADS-B 2 + R c σ v, ADS-B v c 2 ,(5)where σ p. ADS-B is the position measurement standand deviation and σ v, ADS-B is the velocity measurement standard deviation.For active surveillance, Mode-S or Mode-C,σ H, MODE-S/C 2 ≈ (R c σ b, MODE-S/C ) 2 ,(6)where σ b, MODE-S/C is the bearing standard deviation of the Mode-S or Mode-C measurement.For radar,σ H, RADAR 2 ≈ R c 2 * σ b, RADAR 2 + σ v, RADAR 2 v c 2 ,(7)where σ b, RADAR and σ v, RADAR are the bearing and speed standard deviations of the radar measurement, respectively.The final value of ∆ H 0 , the superscript denoting a benchmark value, is a function of the combination of sensors, 1∆ H 0 2 = Σ 1 σ H, sensor 2(8)Table 3 lists the sensor error parameters used for estimating the HMD error and the resulting buffer zone size parameters, ∆ H 0 .Note that the values in parentheses for ∆ H 0 are computed from Eq. 8, and the values before the parentheses are the values actually used in the simulations.
V.C. Encounter Test MatrixThe encounter test matrix for the set of encounters is designed to sample various surveillance equipages, relative speeds, HMDs, relative altitudes, and relative headings.The encounters are intended to cover a wide range of representive parameters but not to model a distribution of encounters.The methodology for selecting representative intruder equipage types is as follows.The air-to-air radar detects all intruding aircraft as they enter the radar's field of view, subject to the radar's probability of detection.Some intruders are equipped with ADS-B out and are, therefore, detectable by the ownship's ADS-B sensor.The FAA has mandated that, by 2020, all all aircraft operating above 10,000 ft mean sea level (MSL) must be equipped with ADS-B out. 20Many of the ADS-B out equipped aircraft will also be equipped with a Mode S transponder.Aircraft not equipped with ADS-B may have a Mode S transponder, a Mode C transponder, or no transponder at all.In this work, intruders are categorized by their equipage types in the following way:• ADS-B out: intruder is detectable by ADS-B and radar.• Mode S: intruder is detectable by Mode S and radar.• No equipage: intruder is detectable by radar.Table 4 lists the independent parameters of an encounter defined by the test matrix.The relative speed, altitude, and heading are with respect to the ownship.A relative heading of zero degrees represents a headon encounter in which the two aircraft are flying towards each other.Passing in front (behind) means the intruder passes in front of (behind) the ownship.The test matrix defines a total of 972 encounters.For each encounter, the two time metrics, τ mod and t pz , are computed as follows:• Kinematics: both the true and estimated ownship navigation solutions and intruder tracks; and• Protected Zone: using D mod disk and protected zone parameterized by a scaling factor, ∆ H /∆ H 0 , that scales the benchmark HMD error ∆ H 0 by 0, 1, 2, and 3. Note that D mod = R 0 + ∆ H and R 0 = 4000 ft.The reason that D mod is set to R 0 + ∆ H is because the HMD threshold should be the same as D mod to avoid oscillating alerts. 21
V.D. Encounter SetupFor each simulated encounter, the ownship is fixed at a specific position and the intruder's initial kinematics are constructed according to the encounter test matrix parameters shown in Table 4, with an initial t cpa = 4 minutes.The intruder trajectories all fly a constant velocity.For analysis of each encounter, both the estimated and true time metrics are computed for tracks with t cpa < 2 minutes.The two minute time window is appropriate for DAA alerts.The time metrics t pz and τ mod are computed for every intruder track estimated by the tracker and the ownship navigation solution with navigation noise.The true time metrics, t pz 0 and τ mod 0 , are computed using the true trajectories.The probability of time reversal, P r , is calculated from Eq. 9:P r = occurrences of increasing time metric in consecutive tracks total number of consecutive tracks (9)   The average absolute error of a time metric is calculated by averaging the absolute difference between a computed time metric (from the noisy tracks) and its true value (from the true tracks) over the two minute window of the encounter:|∆| avg = Σ|t pz -t pz 0 | or Σ|τ mod -τ mod 0 | total number of tracks ,(10)where the superscript 0 denotes a time metric computed from the true tracks.An additional metric, P (HMD ≤ HMD * ), calculates the percentage of noisy tracks that result in an HMD within the HMD threshold, HMD * = R 0 + ∆ H .If the protected zone is wide enough to accommodate HMD errors, this metric should be close to 1.
VI. Simulation ResultsFigure 7 shows results aggregated over all encounters of P r , |∆| avg , and P (HMD ≤ HMD * ) at various degrees of extended protected zone, parameterized by the scaling factor ∆ H /∆ H 0 .The general trend is that both P r and |∆| avg decrease as ∆ H increases.The P r and |∆| avg differences between t pz and τ mod are greatest at ∆ H /∆ H 0 = 0, i.e., no additional buffer zone.Values of P r are higher for t pz than for τ mod by 14%(∆ H /∆ H 0 = 1)-50%(∆ H /∆ H 0 = 0).Values of |∆| avg are higher for t pz than for τ mod by 5%(∆ H /∆ H 0 = 1)-33%(∆ H /∆ H 0 = 0).While the performance of t pz is slightly worse than τ mod , the differences may not be significant enough to degrade the DAA system's alerting performance, especially when ∆ H /∆ H 0 = 1.In the following paragraphs, only results for ∆ H /∆ H 0 = 1 are discussed in more detail.The two sensitivity metrics are highly positively correlated as both increase with the standard deviation of the surveillance errors.Figure 8 shows values of the two metrics for all 972 encounters.The same trends are observed for both metrics in various categories of encounters.Therefore, the following discussion will focus on P r only.Figure 9 shows the probability of reversal, P r , categorized by an intruder's relative speed.For both t pz and τ mod , P r decreases noticeably as the relative speed increases.This trend can be explained as follows.The error of t pz and τ mod can be roughly estimated byδt ≈ -t σ r r + σ ṙ ṙ ,(11)where σ r and σ ṙ represent standard deviations of r and ṙ, respectively, corresponding to surveillance errors.All four sensors provide very accurate range measurements, and the range error therefore contributes much less than the speed error to the time error.The standard deviation of the speed error in both ADS-B and radar models is not a function of velocity.Therefore, the speed error term on the right side of Eq. 11 is inversely proportional to the magnitude of ṙ, and therefore is largest when the relative speed itself is small.A secondary contribution to this trend, although to a lesser extent, is the effect of the sensor's field of view.In high relative speed encounters, the intruder does not enter the sensor's field of view at t cpa = 120 seconds but at later times in the encounter.Since the time metric error decreases as the intruder nears the ownship, the later measurement availability lowers the average time metric error.Comparing t pz results to τ mod results in Figure 9, t pz results in slightly larger median values (the line within the box) at every relative speed.Figure 10 shows the probability of reversal, P r , categorized by intruder equipage.Comparing t pz results across categories, intruders with ADS-B out result in the smallest median value of P r and intruders without any equipage result in the largest median value, approximately 30% greater than the smallest median value.The metric τ mod results display the same trend as the t pz results.Comparing t pz results to τ mod results, t pz leads to a slightly larger median value in every equipage category.Figure 11 shows the probability of reversal categorized by planned HMDs.The probability P r (t pz ) increases with HMD, reaching a larger median value and broader distribution at HMD = 4000 ft.This is because the surface of the Protected Zone becomes "steeper" near 4000 ft (see Figure 2) and causes t pz to be more sensitive to HMD errors.On the other hand, P r distribtions for τ mod are fairly stable across the HMD categories.The value of P r shows little variation with relative altitude, relative heading, and the passing direction.
VII. ConclusionsA new time metric called Time to Protected Zone is proposed for use in UAS's Detect and Avoid (DAA) systems.This time metric, denoted as t pz , has three advantages over the currently adopted modified tau, or τ mod .It corresponds to a well-defined physical event, it is linear with the real time during the progression of an encounter, and it can be used directly to prioritize intruders.When used for defining a Well Clear, t pz addresses several limitations of τ mod .For alerting, t pz can be used directly for intruder prioritization while τ mod is limited by its lack of physical interpretation.For alerting, the protected zone can be defined to be a function of surveillance errors for detecting intruding aircraft to provide potentially better alerting performance.To quantify the sensitivity of t pz to surveillance errors, simulations of encounters using realistic sensor and tracker models are performed.Results show that, with adequately selected protected zones, the sensitivity of t pz to surveillance errors is comparable to that of τ mod .The slight increase of time reversal rates and average time errors by using t pz is likely not enough to impact the alerting performance of a DAA system.Therefore, the choice of t pz over τ mod has advantages and no obvious downside, at least not at a fundamental level.Nonetheless, additional simulations such as MIT Lincoln Lab's encounter models 22 or NASA's NAS-wide simultions 23 that capture a wider variety as well as the statistical nature of encounters must be performed in order to assess the overall performance of t pz .Figure 1 .1Figure 1.A schematic representation of the DWC zone.
Figure 2 .2Figure 2.An example protected zone consisting of a disk with a radius R0 and an additional buffer zone colored in blue.
Figure 3 .3Figure 3.The three time metrics for a head-on encounter.
Intr 1 :1t cpa (t = 0) = 85 sec, v = 50 kts Intr 2: t cpa (t = 0) = 80 sec, v = 80 kts Intr 3: t cpa (t = 0) = 75 sec, v = 500 kts
Figure 4 .4Figure 4. τ mod ranks intruder threats in reverse order as compared to tcpa in a multi-intruder encounter.
Intr 4 :4t pz (t = 0) = 75 sec, v = 50 kts Intr 5: t pz (t = 0) = 80 sec, v = 120 kts Intr 6: t pz (t = 0) = 85 sec, v = 500 kts
Figure 5 .5Figure 5. τ mod ranks intruder threat in reverse order as compared to tpz in a multi-intruder encounter.
PPFigure 8 .8Figure 8. Correlation between Pr (vertical) and |∆|avg (horizontal, seconds).
Figure 9 .9Figure 9. Values of Pr for each relative speed
PFigure 10 .10Figure 10.Values of Pr for each intruder equipage category.
PFigure 11 .11Figure 11.Values of Pr for each value of planned HMD.

Table 1 .1Comparison of the three time metricsTime Metric Physical Event Linear with Time Protecting against Close Intruders mod corresponding to τ mod and R 0 corresponding to t pz are both set to 4000 ft.No additional buffer zone is allocated for the protected zone corresponding to t pz , i.e., ∆ H = 0.At the beginning of the encounter, τ mod is close to t cpa .The metric τ mod drops more rapidly than time towards t pz as the two aircraft approach the CPA.When R 0 = D mod , Apendix A shows that t pz ≤ {t cpa , τ mod } at any predicted time during the encounter.This is a nice property as any zone defined by a t pz threshold in this condition would enclose the corresponding zone defined by a τ mod or t cpa threshold of the same value.t pzYesYesYesτ modNoNoYest cpaYesYesNoD
Table 3 .3Buffer zone parameters and the sensor error parameters used for estimationParameterValue UnitR c5 nmiv c100 ktsσ p, ADS-B2 mσ v, ADS-B2 m/sσ b, MODE-S/C9 degσ b, RADAR0.4 degσ v, RADAR4 m/sσ H, ADSB960 ftσ H, MODE-S/C3880 ftσ H, RADAR1930 ft∆ H, ADS-B0900(860) ft∆ H, MODE-S/C01700(1730) ft∆ H, RADAR01900(1930) ft• Mode C: intruder is detectable by Mode C and radar.
Table 4 .4Parameters of the test matrixParameterValueIntruder EquipageADS-B, Mode S, Mode C, NoneRelative Speed (kts)100, 300, 500HMD (ft)0, 1000, 2000, 3000, 4000Relative Altitude (ft)-500, 0, 500Relative Heading (deg) 0, 45, 90Passingin front, behind (if HMD = 0)
			of 17 American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Downloaded by NASA AMES RESEARCH CENTER on June 9, 2017 | http://arc.aiaa.org| DOI: 10.2514/6.2017-4383
			of 17 American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Downloaded by NASA AMES RESEARCH CENTER on June 9, 2017 | http://arc.aiaa.org| DOI: 10.2514/6.2017-4383
			of 17 American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Downloaded by NASA AMES RESEARCH CENTER on June 9, 2017 | http://arc.aiaa.org| DOI: 10.2514/6.2017-4383
			of 17 American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Downloaded by NASA AMES RESEARCH CENTER on June 9, 2017 | http://arc.aiaa.org| DOI: 10.2514/6.2017-4383
			of 17 American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Downloaded by NASA AMES RESEARCH CENTER on June 9, 2017 | http://arc.aiaa.org| DOI: 10.2514/6.2017-4383
			of 17 American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Downloaded by NASA AMES RESEARCH CENTER on June 9, 2017 | http://arc.aiaa.org| DOI: 10.2514/6.2017-4383
			of 17 American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Downloaded by NASA AMES RESEARCH CENTER on June
			9, 2017 | http://arc.aiaa.org| DOI: 10.2514/6.2017-4383
			Downloaded by NASA AMES RESEARCH CENTER on June 9, 2017 | http://arc.aiaa.org| DOI: 10.2514/6.2017-4383
			of 17 American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Downloaded by NASA AMES RESEARCH CENTER on June 9, 2017 | http://arc.aiaa.org| DOI: 10.2514/6.2017-4383
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Downloaded by NASA AMES RESEARCH CENTER on June 9, 2017 | http://arc.aiaa.org| DOI: 10.2514/6.2017-4383
		
		
			
V.B. Surveillance-Dependent Protected ZoneFor DAA alerting criteria, it is desirable to augment the disk-shaped protected zone with a buffer zone.This additional buffer compensates for surveillance errors and reduces fluctuation of alerts.Surveillance errors vary with the sensor type as well as the intruder's relative range and velocity from the ownship.Therefore, the dimensions of the additional buffer zone can potentially be a function of not just the sensor type, but also of other parameters such as the intruder's range, speed, and time to CPA.a when elevation is within ±10 • b when elevation is outside ±10 • c when bearing is within ±45 • d when bearing is between ±45 • and ±135 • e when bearing is outside ±135 • f when elevation is within ±10 The scalar horizontal range r and range rate ṙ are defined asFor a closing geometry, ṙ < 0 and r • ṙ < 0. Let r, ṙ, r and ṙ represent the values at t = 0, or the beginning of an encounter.The time metric t cpa is the time at which the predicted r, using constant-velocity trajectories, reaches a minimum.Therefore, (r + t cpa ṙ) • ṙ = 0, and (A.3a)If ṙ ≤ 0, t cpa can be conveniently defined to be 0. The HMD is, by definition, the horizontal distance between the intruder and the ownship at t cpa .HMD ≡ |r + t cpa ṙ| (A.4)Taking the square of both sides of Eq.A.4 and substituting Eq.A.3 for t cpa :Eq. A.5 can be rearranged to derive an expression for r • ṙ, valid when r ≥ HMD,where the negative sign indicates a closing geometry.The time metric t pz is defined as the predicted time for the intruder to reach the protected zone.If the predicted trajectory does not intercept the protected zone, then t pz = t cpa .By Eq. ( 2), it is clear that t pz ≤ t cpa .The following paragraphs prove that,The additional buffer zone decreases t pz because the resulting protected zone has dimensions larger than the disk of radius R 0 .Therefore, it suffices to prove that Eq.A.7 holds when the protected zone is a disk.When r ≤ D mod , both t pz and τ mod are zero and, therefore, Eq.A.7 holds because the intruder is already in the protected zone.When r > D mod , rewrite τ mod as a distance divided by the relative speed, |ṙ|:where Eqs.A.2 and A.6 are used to derive Eq.A.8. Similarly, rewrite t pz in Eq. 2 as a distance divided by the relative speed, |ṙ|, to becomeSubtracting Eq.A.9 from Eq. A.8 results in hence the proof of Eq.A.7 is completed.			
			

				


	
		Defining Well Clear for Unmanned Aircraft Systems
		
			StephenPCook
		
		
			DallasBrooks
		
		
			RodneyCole
		
		
			DavisHackenberg
		
		
			VincentRaska
		
		10.2514/6.2015-0481
		AIAA-2015-0481
	
	
		AIAA Infotech @ Aerospace
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			2015
		
	
	Cook, S. P., Brooks, D., Cole, R., Hackenberg, D., and Raska, V., "Defining Well Clear for Unmanned Aircraft Systems," Proceedings of AIAA Infotech@ Aerospace, AIAA-2015-0481, AIAA, 2015.



	
		Characteristics of a Well Clear Definition and Alerting Criteria for Encounters between UAS and Manned Aircraft in Class E Airspace
		
			MJohnson
		
		
			ERMueller
		
		
			CSantiago
		
	
	
		Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar
		
			
			2015
		
	
	Eleventh UAS
	Johnson, M., Mueller, E. R., and Santiago, C., "Characteristics of a Well Clear Definition and Alerting Criteria for Encounters between UAS and Manned Aircraft in Class E Airspace," Eleventh UAS/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar , 2015, pp. 23-26.



	
		FAA Position on Building Consensus around the SARP Well-Clear Definition
		
			DWalker
		
	
	
		RTCA Special Committee
		
			228
			2014
		
	
	Walker, D., "FAA Position on Building Consensus around the SARP Well-Clear Definition," RTCA Special Committee, Vol. 228, 2014.



	
		Flight Test Overview for UAS Integration in the NAS Project
		
			JamesRMurphy
		
		
			PeggySWilliams-Hayes
		
		
			SamKKim
		
		
			WayneBridges
		
		
			MichaelMarston
		
		10.2514/6.2016-1756
		AIAA-2016-1756
	
	
		AIAA Atmospheric Flight Mechanics Conference
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			2016
		
	
	AIAA SciTech
	Murphy, J. R., Hayes, P. S., Kim, S. K., Bridges, W., and Marston, M., "Flight Test Overview for UAS Integration in the NAS Project," AIAA Atmospheric Flight Mechanics Conference, AIAA SciTech, AIAA-2016-1756, 2016.



	
		NATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON DEVELOPMENTS IN IRRADIATION TESTING TECHNOLOGY, SEPTEMBER 9--11, 1969, NASA LEWIS RESEARCH CENTER, SANDUSKY, OHIO.
		
			SMLee
		
		
			CPark
		
		
			DPThipphavong
		
		
			DRIsaacson
		
		
			CSantiago
		
		10.2172/4165376
	
	
		NASA/TM-2016-219067, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
		
			Office of Scientific and Technical Information (OSTI)
			2016
		
	
	Lee, S. M., Park, C., Thipphavong, D. P., Isaacson, D. R., and Santiago, C., "Evaluating Alerting and Guidance Performance of a UAS Detect-And-Avoid System," NASA/TM-2016-219067, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Ames Research Center, 2016.



	
		Analysis of alerting performance for detect and avoid of unmanned aircraft systems
		
			SamanthaSmearcheck
		
		
			SeanCalhoun
		
		
			WilliamAdams
		
		
			JaredKresge
		
		
			FabriceKunzi
		
		10.1109/plans.2016.7479766
	
	
		2016 IEEE/ION Position, Location and Navigation Symposium (PLANS)
		
			IEEE
			2016
			
		
	
	Smearcheck, S., Calhoun, S., Adams, W., Kresge, J., and Kunzi, F., "Analysis of Alerting Performance for Detect and Avoid of Unmanned Aircraft Systems," IEEE/ION Position, Location and Navigation Symposium (PLANS), 2016, pp. 710-730.



	
		An Evaluation of Detect and Avoid (DAA) Displays for Unmanned Aircraft Systems: The Effect of Information Level and Display Location on Pilot Performance
		
			LisaFern
		
		
			RConradRorie
		
		
			JessicaPack
		
		
			JayShively
		
		
			MarkDraper
		
		10.2514/6.2015-3327
		AIAA-2015-3327
	
	
		15th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			2015
		
	
	Fern, L., Rorie, R. C., Pack, J. S., Shively, R. J., and Draper, M. H., "An Evaluation of Detect and Avoid (DAA) Displays for Unmanned Aircraft Systems: The Effect of Information Level and Display Location on Pilot Performance," Proceedings of 15th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference, AIAA-2015-3327, 2015.



	
		The Generic Resolution Advisor and Conflict Evaluator (GRACE) for Detect-And-Avoid (DAA) Systems
		
			MichaelAbramson
		
		
			MohamadRefai
		
		
			ConfesorSantiago
		
		10.2514/6.2017-4485
	
	
		17th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			June 2017
		
	
	Abramson, M., Refai, M., and Santiago, C., "A Generic Resolution Advisor and Conflict Evaluator (GRACE) in Ap- plications to Detect-And-Avoid (DAA) Systems of Unmanned Aircraft," Proceedings of the 17th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations (ATIO) Conference, June 2017.



	
		DAIDALUS: Detect and Avoid Alerting Logic for Unmanned Systems
		
			CesarMunoz
		
		
			AnthonyNarkawicz
		
		
			GeorgeHagen
		
		
			JasonUpchurch
		
		
			AaronDutle
		
		
			MariaConsiglio
		
		
			JamesChamberlain
		
		10.1109/dasc.2015.7311421
	
	
		2015 IEEE/AIAA 34th Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC)
		
			IEEE
			2015
			
		
	
	Muñoz, C., Narkawicz, A., Hagen, G., Upchurch, J., Dutle, A., Consiglio, M., and Chamberlain, J., "DAIDALUS: Detect and Avoid Alerting Logic for Unmanned Systems," 34th Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC), IEEE/AIAA, 2015, pp. 5A1-1.



	
		Development, Integration and Testing of a Stand-alone CDTI with Conflict Probing Support
		
			BrandonSuarez
		
		
			KevinKirk
		
		
			ErikTheunissen
		
		10.2514/6.2012-2487
	
	
		Infotech@Aerospace 2012
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			2012. 2012, p. 2487. Feb. 2011
		
	
	Conflict Prediction and Display System (CPDS). 11. Introduction to TCAS II Version 7.1," HQ-111358, Federal Aviation Administration (FAA
	Suarez, B., Kirk, K., and Theunissen, E., "Development, Integration and Testing of a Stand-Alone CDTI with Conflict Probing Support," Infotech@ Aerospace 2012 , 2012, p. 2487, Conflict Prediction and Display System (CPDS). 11 "Introduction to TCAS II Version 7.1," HQ-111358, Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Feb. 2011.



	
		Multi-intruder aircraft, multi-sensor tracking system
		
			VibhorLBageshwar
		
		
			EricAEuteneuer
		
		10.1109/dasc.2015.7311425
	
	
		2015 IEEE/AIAA 34th Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC)
		
			IEEE
			2015
			
		
	
	Bageshwar, V. L. and Euteneuer, E. A., "Multi-Intruder Aircraft, Multi-Sensor Tracking System," 34th Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC), IEEE/AIAA, 2015, pp. 5A5-1-13.



	
		A Family of Well-Clear Boundary Models for the Integration of UAS in the NAS
		
			CesarMunoz
		
		
			AnthonyNarkawicz
		
		
			JamesChamberlain
		
		
			MariaCConsiglio
		
		
			JasonMUpchurch
		
		10.2514/6.2014-2412
		No. AIAA-2014-2412
	
	
		14th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference
		Georgia, Atlanta, USA
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			June 2014
		
	
	Muñoz, C., Narkawicz, A., Chamberlain, J., Consiglio, M., and Upchurch, J., "A Family of Well-Clear Boundary Models for the Integration of UAS in the NAS," Proceedings of the 14th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations (ATIO) Conference, No. AIAA-2014-2412, Georgia, Atlanta, USA, June 2014.



	
		A Well-Clear Volume Based on Time to Entry Point
		
			AJNarkawicz
		
		
			CAMuñoz
		
		
			JMUpchurch
		
		
			JPChamberlain
		
		
			MCConsiglio
		
	
	
		NASA/TM-2014-218155, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
		
			Langley Research Center
			2014
			15
		
	
	Narkawicz, A. J., Muñoz, C. A., Upchurch, J. M., Chamberlain, J. P., and Consiglio, M. C., "A Well-Clear Volume Based on Time to Entry Point," NASA/TM-2014-218155, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Langley Research Center, 2014. 15



	
		Aircraft collision avoidance based on GPS position broadcasts
		
			RYGazit
		
		
			JDPowell
		
		10.1109/dasc.1996.559189
	
	
		15th DASC. AIAA/IEEE Digital Avionics Systems Conference
		
			IEEE
			1996
			
		
	
	15th Digital Avionics Systems Conference
	Gazit, R. Y. and Powell, J. D., "Aircraft Collision Avoidance Based on GPS Position Broadcasts," 15th Digital Avionics Systems Conference, IEEE/AIAA, 1996, pp. 393-399.



	
		The Protected Volume of Airspace Generated by an Airborne Collision Avoidance System
		
			RLFord
		
		10.1017/s0373463300000035
	
	
		Journal of Navigation
		J. Navigation
		0373-4633
		1469-7785
		
			39
			2
			
			1986
			Cambridge University Press (CUP)
		
	
	Ford, R., "The Protected Volume of Airspace Generated by an Airborne Collision Avoidance System," Journal of Navi- gation, Vol. 39, No. 02, 1986, pp. 139-158.



	
		Analysis of Well-Clear Boundary Models for the Integration of UAS in the NAS
		
			JMUpchurch
		
		
			CAMuñoz
		
		
			AJNarkawicz
		
		
			JPChamberlain
		
		
			MCConsiglio
		
	
	
		NASA/TM-2014-218280, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
		
			Langley Research Center
			2014
		
	
	Upchurch, J. M., Muñoz, C. A., Narkawicz, A. J., Chamberlain, J. P., and Consiglio, M. C., "Analysis of Well-Clear Boundary Models for the Integration of UAS in the NAS," NASA/TM-2014-218280, National Aeronautics and Space Admin- istration, Langley Research Center, 2014.



	
		UAS Integration in the NAS Project: Flight Test 3 Data Analysis of JADEM-Autoresolver Detect and Avoid System
		
			CGong
		
		
			MGWu
		
		
			CSantiago
		
	
	
		NASA/TM-2014-218155, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
		
			Ames Research Center
			2016
		
	
	Gong, C., Wu, M. G., and Santiago, C., "UAS Integration in the NAS Project: Flight Test 3 Data Analysis of JADEM- Autoresolver Detect and Avoid System," NASA/TM-2014-218155, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Ames Research Center, 2016.



	
		Feature article: proof-of-concept airborne sense and avoid system with ACAS-X<sub>U</sub> flight test
		
			TatsuyaKotegawa
		
		
			BSuarez
		
		
			CGong
		
		
			VLBageshwar
		
		
			EAEuteneuer
		
		
			CLeeper
		
		
			EMaki
		
		
			ETheunissen
		
		10.1109/maes.2016.150163
		
	
	
		IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine
		IEEE Aerosp. Electron. Syst. Mag.
		0885-8985
		
			31
			9
			
			2016. 20
			Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
		
	
	Kotegawa, T., Suarez, B., Gong, C., Bageshwar, V. L., Euteneuer, E. A., Leeper, C., Maki, E., and Theunissen, E., "Proof-of-Concept Airborne Sense and Avoid System with ACAS-X U Flight Test," IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine, Vol. 31, No. 9, 2016, pp. 53-62. 20 https://www.faa.gov/nextgen/programs/adsb/faq/#1.



	
		Formal Analysis of Extended Well-Clear Boundaries for Unmanned Aircraft
		
			CésarMuñoz
		
		
			AnthonyNarkawicz
		
		10.1007/978-3-319-40648-0_17
	
	
		Lecture Notes in Computer Science
		Lecture Notes in Computer Science
		
			SRayadurgam
		
		
			OTkachuk
		
		Minneapolis, MN
		
			Springer International Publishing
			June 2016
			9690
			
		
	
	Muñoz, C. and Narkawicz, A., "Formal Analysis of Extended Well-Clear Boundaries for Unmanned Aircraft," Proceedings of the 8th NASA Formal Methods Symposium (NFM 2016), edited by S. Rayadurgam and O. Tkachuk, Vol. 9690 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, Minneapolis, MN, June 2016, pp. 221-226.



	
		Extended Airspace Encounter Models for Unmanned Aircraft Sense and Avoid Safety Evaluation
		
			AndrewJWeinert
		
		
			EricHarkleroad
		
		
			JohnGriffith
		
		
			MatthewWEdwards
		
		10.2514/6.2013-5049
	
	
		AIAA Infotech@Aerospace (I@A) Conference
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			2013
		
	
	Tech. rep., DTIC Document
	Weinert, A. J., Harkleroad, E. P., Griffith, J., Edwards, M. W., and Kochenderfer, M. J., "Uncorrelated Encounter Model of the National Airspace System, Version 2.0," Tech. rep., DTIC Document, 2013.



	
		Build 8 of the Airspace Concept Evaluation System
		
			SapaGeorge
		
		
			GoutamSatapathy
		
		
			VikramManikonda
		
		
			KeePalopo
		
		
			LarryMeyn
		
		
			ToddLauderdale
		
		
			MichaelDowns
		
		
			MohamadRefai
		
		
			RichardDupee
		
		10.2514/6.2011-6373
	
	
		AIAA Modeling and Simulation Technologies Conference
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			2011
			6373
		
	
	George, S., Satapathy, G., Manikonda, V., Palopo, K., Meyn, L., Lauderdale, T., Downs, M., Refai, M., and Dupee, R., "Build 8 of the Airspace Concept Evaluation System," AIAA modeling and simulation technologies conference, 2011, p. 6373.


				
			
		
	
