
	
	
		
INTRODUCTIONThe Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) is in the midst of upgrading air traffic control facilities around the nation, some of which date back to the 1950s.Although air traffic controllers continue to be the traffic management decision makers, both the FAA and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) are developing automation tools for these facilities to assist the controllers in the decision process.One such tool is the Center-TRACON Automation System (CTAS) (ref.5) characteristics, airspace models, real-time radar tracking, and weather data to develop optimal 4-D trajectories for all aircraft in a Center destined to a TRACON within the Center.These trajectories are used to estimate when an aircraft arrives at a particular 4-D target, such as a feeder fix into a TRACON.These estimates are referred to as estimated times of arrival (ETA) to a feeder fix.Although time based scheduling is considered to be an "optimal" traffic management technique (refs. 3 and 4), only two out of twenty Centers in the United States use timebased scheduling as the primary traffic management technique.The primary traffic management technique used by most Centers in the United States is Miles-in-Trail (MinT).MinT is a technique used for lining up traffic in trail and selecting how many miles should be placed between aircraft in the trail.We refer to these trails as streams.A Center has several streams of traffic feeding a TRACON at feeder fixes (fig.1).Center scheduling requires predicting what effect these streams of traffic have on the TRACON over a scheduling time range.That is, appropriate separation requirements must be placed on each stream so that over a scheduling time range the correct number of aircraft enter the TRACON from all the streams.The time range may be between 15 and 30 minutes.Over this time range, if too many aircraft are estimated to arrive at their feeder fixes, the TMC spreads out and delays the traffic so that an acceptable number of aircraft arrive at the feeder fixes.To do this, the TMC imposes different MinT restrictions on each stream, which means that all aircraft in a stream must be separated by at least the MinT value.The algorithm presented in this paper addresses issues associated with adapting the time-based scheduling provided by CTAS to provide MinT restrictions.MinT is an important element of CTAS, for the infrastructure throughout the country and the experience in using MinT restrictions in the U.S. can make it easier to incorporate MinT automation aids than time-based scheduling aids, at least in the nascence of modern air traffic control.The remainder of the paper is organized to provide a brief description of the air traffic problem for which the algorithm has been designed to solve, to describe a general solution technique for this problem, to describe methods for identifying traffic characteristics which are relavant to the scheduling process, and to provide a detailed description of the algorithm, and simulation results based on the algorithm.
THE PROBLEMPart of the process of traffic management is determining when to alter the course of the traffic flow.This paper addresses the problem of a "rush" and how to distribute traffic such that one avoids a "traffic jam."There is a rush when the traffic expected to arrive at a TRACON over a scheduling time range, as predicted by traffic ETAs, exceeds that which is permitted by the TRACON constraints.During a rush, the TMC must issue restrictions at enough streams to reduce the traffic.TMCs across the nation use different techniques to achieve this traffic reduction.TMCs at one Center could try to distribute aircraft delays in a manner which preserves the projected aircraft arrival order, referred to as "first come first serve."This can result in restrictions on every stream.Other Centers apply most of the restrictions on streams with light traffic to reduce the workload that would be incurred by restrictions on "heavy" streams and to increase the traffic throughput.Automating the scheduling process is difficult, not only because the automation must be able to use either of these restriction techniques to be adaptable to the particular techniques used in a Center, but also because there are many combinations of stream restrictions which can reduce the traffic to the proper number of aircraft.The scheduling tool must select only a few of the many solutions to present to the TMC who could use one of the solutions, modify a solution, or modify the constraints used by the scheduler to develop a new solution.
SOLUTION TECHNIQUEThe algorithm attempts to distribute delay in an equitable fashion, but restricts lighter traffic streams before restricting streams with heavy traffic, thus reducing total controller workload.The algorithm also has constraints which the TMC can modify, which include: the time range, tf -tO, over which to derive a solution; the maximum acceptable number of aircraft, Nacc, permitted to enter the TRACON sometime during this time range; the minimum number of aircraft in a stream which make the stream a candidate for restrictions; the maximum MinT restriction to be used by the algorithm; and prescribed MinT values on as many streams asthe TMC chooses.The scheduling objective is to determine howmanymilesto placebetween aircrafton streams whichhavenot hadtheir restriction prescribed by the TMC.Theserestrictions must resultin an acceptable amount of trafficenteringthe TRACON.Themainobjectiveof thisalgorithmis to attempt to distribute aircraftdelaysequitably, with aconstraint to impose restrictions on streams with light trafficbefore imposingrestrictions on streams with heavytraffic.Thus,the algorithmtries to reducetotal Center controllerworkload, whilemaintaining a sense of balancein delaydistribution."Equitable"means placing restrictionswhich preserve the ratio of the stream's unrestricted to total unrestricted traffic.After placing restrictions for all streams, a refinement algorithmis usedto reducesomeof the trafficrestrictions, starting with streams whichare the mostdifficult to restrict.Detailsof this algorithmarepresentedin the next section.
Equitable Delay DistributionFor each stream, j, determine the maximum number of aircraft, N_ ax, that can be scheduled to enter the TRACON over the scheduling time range, while adhering to FAA minimum separation constraints for the Center, and while adhering to the TMC's commanded separations.Note that this count may differ from a count based on current ETAs to the feeder fix, which are calculated as described in the introduction, because a count based on ETAs can violate FAA regulations for minimum separation between aircraft in the Center.The scheduled times of arrival (STA) to the feeder fixes for all aircraft are calculated as follows.First sequence the traffic in a stream by ETAs.Label these ETA1 ... ETAn, where ETA1 is the time at which the first aircraft, acl, is expected to arrive at the feeder fix for this stream.Schedule acl to arrive at its ETA,STA1 = ETA1 (1)Now determine the flight time AT2 for the second aircraft, ac2, to fly rain nautical miles, where min is the minimum required distance separating ac2 from acl when acl crosses the feeder fix for this stream.That is to say, when acl crosses the destination, ac2 should be no closer than min nautical miles to the destination.rain is equal to 5 nautical miles or the value set by the TMC.The flight time information, AT2, is determined by CTAS trajectory routines as a function of aircraft flight characteristics, weather, air carrier procedures and more (ref.1).Adding AT2 to STA1 yields the earliest STA for ac2.STA_ in = STA1 + AT2 (2)If STA_ in is later than ETA2, schedule ac2 to STA_ nin.Otherwise, schedule ac2 to arrive at ETA2.This is done because the algorithm under consideration does not "speed up" an aircraft to get in ahead of the current estimated time of arrival.The algorithm can easily be modified to allow aircraft to speed up, especially to "front load" the TRACON in a rush.However, for this discussion, assume that the ETAs are the preferred arrival times for the aircraft.Proceed with this logic until STAs have been assigned to all the aircraft in a stream.STA m_n --STAi_ 1 + AT_ (3) STA rain if STA rain > ETAi;(4 ) STAi =ETAi, otherwise Now determine N? ax, the maximum aircraft count which could be scheduled to enter the TRACON from stream j between to and tf.This is accomplished by counting the number of aircraft scheduled between t0 and t f .nj { 1, if tO<_STAi<_tf; Ny_ax = _ 0, otherwise i=1 (5) The maximum aircraft count predicted to enter the TRACON over this scheduling region is just the sum of the individual maximum counts for each stream,S Nmax= _-_N? ax j=l (6)where S is the number of streams being controlled.If Nmax is equal to or below the accepted count for this range, Nacc, the schedule is acceptable.Otherwise, proceed as follows.Determine how many aircraft, NTMC, have been scheduled by the TMC between to and tf.This may be done by finding a stream's ratio of maximum count to total unrestricted countS _ N_aax if MinT set byTMC NTMC = _ [ 0, otherwise(
N_ ax -----(_o)
Rj--Nunand multiplying this ratio by Nde 8 to get this stream's desired countN/es = RjNde 8 (11)Of course, the likelihood that this results in an integral number of aircraft is very low.Furthermore, the exact MinT needed to separate traffic out to achieve this count is likely to be unacceptable as a target value--MinT commands are issued in increments of 5 nautical miles.The exact value is unlikely to meet this requirement.Although these limitations can bring to question the usefulness of this distribution function, it will be shown that it can be used to form a fairly reasonable solution.REALISTIC SOLUTION achieve a commanded separation between aircraft than does lower density traffic.As such, if there were a choice in where to place a higher restriction, a low density stream is chosen to avoid unnecessary work load on a controller of a more dense stream.Having enumerated the streams, the desired traffic count for each stream is calculated using equation ( 11), which in turn is used to determine a valid separation.Typically a valid separation is an integral number of 5 nautical miles.This value, MinTj, is most likely to cause the traffic count, Nj, to be less than N/es, resulting in traffic loss.This traffic loss is recorded and summed for all streams to measure the over-restrictions placed on the traffic.After a preliminary schedule has been created using this logic, a refinement algorithm reduces separation constraints, if such reductions result in a traffic count closer to but not exceeding the desired count.
TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATIONThe decision of which streams to place restrictions on is based on an evaluation of the current traffic patterns in each stream.These patterns must be quantified for the scheduler to distinguish between streams of varying traffic patterns.One parameter useful for evaluating traffic is cumulative delay.Although useful for post-evaluation of a schedule, this does not help determine a schedule, for delay depends on the schedule.The following parameters can quantify traffic patterns based solely on ETAs, and are used to decide which streams should be restricted first in the scheduling process.Figure 2 shows three traffic patterns which could evolve over a scheduling time range to to tf.Each vertical line in the figure represents an aircraft in a stream.In particular, each line represents the time at which the aircraft is estimated to arrive at the feeder fix for the stream.We use this figure to describe the advantages and disadvantages of two traffic identifiers, ETA density and ETA integral developed for MinT scheduling.With only slight modifications, the delay distribution logic presented earlier can be altered to provide a plausible solution to the traffic distribution problem.The stream ratios are determined as described earlier.A method for measuring a stream's traffic density is also developed.After determining the traffic density of every stream, the streams are enumerated based on density.Greater density traffic requires more effort to
ETA DensityAfter enumerating the aircraft in a stream of traffic by their ETAs, calculate the ETA density as the sum of the squares of the differences in aircraft ETAs for the stream.nj pj = _-+ (nj -1) 2 _(ETAi -ETAi_I) 2 (12) i=2 -% -1)2[(ETA1 -to) 2+ (ts-ETAnS) 2]Take the sum of the squares rather than just the sum of the differences for the following reason: the sum of the differences in ETAs is the same for all three traffic patterns (fig.3).Thus the two straight lines represent MinT restriction bounds between minimum separation and holding.The ETA arrival rate curve for TOMSN_A shows that seven aircraft are projected to arrive at TOMSN during the scheduling period.The results of a MinT restriction of 30 nautical miles on the stream cause the seventh aircraft in the stream to arrive at TOMSN after the 2400 second limit (fig.4).Note that the scheduled arrival time of the second aircraft in the stream remains the same as before the restrictions (figs.3 and4).This is because the scheduler does not "speed up" aircraft, as mentioned earlier.A restriction of 30 nautical miles delays the second through the seventh aircraft enough to reduce the traffic count into the TRACON by one over the scheduling period.The arrival rate graph carries more information than do the ETA density or ETA integral.However, for automated scheduling, a parameter must be used to predict traffic development.The ETA integral seems to be tee best choice, as it can distinguish between patterns (HID in figure 2. However, it is not clear that traffic with pattern (II) requires greater workload in maintaining a given separation than traffic with pattern (III), for (III) can serve as an indicator that this traffic is likely to require greater work load in the future if something is not done with the traffic now.ETA density rates pattern (III) higher than pattern (II), something which can be useful in determining that restrictions put into effect now should not overburden a controller who could need to separate traffic later.For the purposes of analysis in this report, the ETA integral is used to sort the streams, but "traffic density" is used as a generic name for the metric used to distinguish between streams.After sorting all streams by traffic density, the scheduling process begins with the lowest density stream by determining, as previously described, the maximum number of aircraft, N_ naz, which can be scheduled to enter the TRACON between to and tf.If this count is less than some minimum scheduling count, Nmin, whereNmin ,_ 5%Nacc(14)then proceed to the next stream.That is, a stream must have at least Nmi n aircraft to be included in the restriction process.The value can be set by the TMC, and has been set to five percent of the acceptance count as a default.If the stream's MinT was set by the TMC, continue on to the next stream.Otherwise proceed with the first stream as follows.Determine the unrestricted traffic ratio, R1, for this stream, equation (10), multiply this ratio by Nde s, and truncate to get the desired traffic count, N des.
N_ _+= [RiNdesJ (15)If this truncated value is greater than or equal to N_ nax, leave the stream unrestricted.Otherwise, add minimum separation increments to the stream separation (typically this is an increment of 5 nautical miles) and count the traffic resulting from the new schedule.where Sres is the number of streams restricted to assure that NtlViinT is less than or equal to Nde s.It is worth mentioning that after having cycled through all the streams, the scheduled count can still exceed the acceptance count.This can indicate one of several causes.Causes can be that the TMC restrictions were too low, or the traffic is arriving at the minimum scheduling rate, Nrnin, over many streams, or the desired traffic count is too far below the current count to be achieved without issuing holding restrictions (putting aircraft into holding patterns).The maximum restriction used by this scheduler is 35 MinT.Any greater restrictions are considered to be holding restrictions.Whatever the causes, the TMC is expected to alter the scheduling constraints before expecting the scheduler to develop more meaningful results.The more likely scenario is that the traffic is too restricted and the refinement algorithm is used to increase NIMinT •
REFINEMENT SOLUTIONThe refinement algorithm tries to remove some ret while keeping the traffic strictions to increase NMinT, count into the TRACON at or below Nde s.Beginning with the most dense stream, remove one increment of restriction; if the restriction is greater than 5 nautical miles, count the resulting traffic, N).Add this addit tional traffic, N} nc, to N_MinT to form a new scheduled count NMinT whereN} nc = NIS -N S (24)If NMinT is still equal to or below Nde s, schedule the stream with this lower MinT value.Otherwise, keep the previous value.In either case, continue to the next stream and perform similar calculations.Ninc t incj Ninc NMinT =--NMinT + _,j t NMinT = NMinT S { hrinc + E _'S--J+I, j=l O, if N incS-j+l < Nde s Mint otherwise (25) (26)This is done for all streams for the following reason.If there is a great difference in traffic count coming in through different streams, then reducing restrictions from a heavy stream can result in a lot of additional traffic coming through that stream, resulting in a total count which exceeds the desired count.If we were to stop here, we miss the opportunity of reducing restrictions on a lighter stream which would only increase the traffic count slightly, thus getting closer to the actual desired count, without exceeding it.It is worth noting that for this process of refinement, we have begun with the heaviest stream.This is again due to the fact that restrictions on the heavy streams require more effort than restrictions on the light streams, so reducing restrictions equates to reducing the work load, and possibly increasing the efficiency of the traffic flow.(27)
RESULTSTo facilitate further research into the details of MinT scheduling, a low fidelity air traffic simulator has been developed in C ++.This simulator has been used to run traffic simulations which were based on random number generation for aircraft ETAs and it has been used to read in data files from real traffic.Although work continues on refining the simulator, useful information about the effectiveness of the MinT logic has already been gained.It turns out that if there is a "heavy siderush,"whichis to saythata few streams contain mostofthetrafficexpected toentertheTRACON, then MinTdevelopedby the scheduler seemquitereasonable.Problems arise_ however, whenthereareonlya few aircraftper stream, but therearemanystreams.Forexample, DenverInternational airportcanhave16 streams of traffic.If eachstream hasthreeaircraft over a thirtyminuteinterval, andtheTRACON is accepting aircraftattherateof 44 aircraft per30minuteinterval, it is not clearhowto placerestrictions onthestreams tokeepfour aircraft fromentering theTRACON.If the trafficis alreadywell spread outon eachstream, then threeaircraftperthirty minutescouldmeanasmuch as15minutes, or 75 milesseparation between aircraft in a stream, based onETAs.Althoughanunlikelyscenario,it doesseem possible, anddemonstrates thatlow densitytrafficon manystreams canposea scheduling problem.Thelargerthetimerange overwhicha solutionis derived., thegreater thepotential is for deriving restrictions whichseemexcessive.Thusthe average spacing of traffic in a stream overanhourmaybe50 or 60 miles,although20 minutes fromnowa packof aircraftareestimated to arriveoneminuteapart.The scheduler updates as oftenas possibleto be ableto refinesolutions based on actual trafficdevelopment.Figures5-8 depictETAandSTArategraphs, respectively, for all trafficsimulated to be flyingin the DenverCenter usingnewStandard Arrival Routes for Denver International Airport.Therategraphs aresnapshotsof projectedtraffic.Althoughat first glancethe rategraphs for all trafficmayappear arcane, thereare usefulproperties of thetrafficwhicharereadilyapparentfromthegraph.Forexample, wecanveryquickly determine howmanyaircraftarein eachstream over the samplingtime by readingthe total aircraftcount for eachstream.Forexample, fromfigure6 weseethatPowdr_BC has 14 aircraft estimated to arrive over the total sampling period, and Ramms_A has 11 aircraft projected to arrive over the sampling period.Also, we can very quickly get an estimate of where the traffic is most dense, as depicted by the slope of the arrival curves.Therefore, traffic arriving from the western streams remains fairly dense during the scheduling period from 0 to 2400 seconds, with the exception of TomsnJ_C and PowdrA.Traffic density on the eastern streams is low until about 1800 seconds.From 1800 to about 3000 seconds we detect a surge in traffic density on the Eastern stream s, depicted by the steeper slopes of  From equation ( 14) we realize that traffic arriving from the first five streams in table 1 was not included for restrictions.To preserve the desired ratios according to equation (15), the traffic counts on each stream were to be reduced by only a fraction of an aircraft, then truncated.Thus, the scheduler was requested to introduce restrictions for each stream, beginning with TomsnSBC, to delay one aircraft from arriving within the scheduling period, until five aircraft had been delayed outside this period.Note that the scheduler has developed restrictions which did not affect the three streams with greatest traffic density, thus presumably reducing controller workload.The solution is also equitable in attempting to preserve the estimated traffic ratios for each stream.Note that the restrictions on streams Tomsn_BC, Dandd_C, and Quail_A are unnecessary, as the traffic in these streams is already sufficiently separated, and restrictions on these streams have no effect on the desired traffic count.Finally, table 2 shows how many aircraft were scheduled to enter the TRACON compared with the acceptance rates requested for several simulations of the new and old airspace configurations for Denver.As one can see the scheduler does well in restricting the traffic to the desired count.The table also shows how quickly the traffic requires restrictions of 35 nautical miles on all streams to reduce the traffic count to the desired count.The algorithm has met the objective of distributing traffic reductions which reduces the traffic count to the desired count in most cases, and the solutions met the objective of reducing controller workload, as measured by ETA integral, while maintaining a sense of equitable delay distribution.However, as previously stated, it remains to be seen, through traffic simulations with TMCs, whether or not the assumptions herein meet the ultimate objective of providing an automation tool which effectively aids the TMC in his traffic restriction decision process.which reduce the predicted traffic count to a desired count.Two traffic identifiers have been created to evaluate traffic based on aircraft ETAs-the ETA density and ETA integral.These are used as measures which relate to controller workload in executing a scheduling plan.A graphical technique for monitoring the traffic conditions has also been developed.The technique is referred to as an arrival rate graph which allows one to quickly determine traffic count from each stream over a scheduling period, and traffic arrival rate from a stream to a destination.These identifiers were used in traffic simulations using the scheduling algorithm here presented.The results provided by the algorithm should reduce controller work load, as measured by the ETA integral.The restrictions are equitable in distributing aircraft delay over the streams, when one accounts for the fact that the restriction technique must affect an entire stream of traffic.Results from simulations run with the algorithm are favorable when most of the traffic is developed to enter through a few streams.Figure 1 .1Figure 1.Center TRACON boundary.
7) j=l Remove thiscountfromthetotalcountNmax, to get the unrestricted traffic count over the streams for which the scheduler is to derive MinT values.Call this Nun.Nun = Nmax -NTMC (8) The scheduler derives MinT values to reduce Nun such that the scheduled count into the TRACON between to and tf fails below or is equivalent to the acceptance count, Nacc.The scheduler derives MinT values for the traffic affected by the scheduler, and does not override restrictions manually imposed by the TMC.So NTM C can be removed from Nacc to get the desired count, the scheduler attempts to provide Ndes= Nacc-NTMC (9)Many techniques could be used to reduce the traffic to the desired count.One technique is to attempt to distribute the traffic reduction evenly across all streams.
Figure 2 .2Figure 2. Three arrival time traffic patterns.
Figure 3 .3Figure 3. ETA arrival rate graph.
Continue to increase the restrictions until the scheduled traffic count, N1, is equal to or has dropped below Ndl es, at which point the MinT is acceptable (conservative) for this stream.Subtracting N1 from N_ nax yields the traffic reduction, N_ ed, due to restrictions for the first stream N_ ed = N_ nax -N1 (16) Subtracting N1 from Ndl es results in the number of overly restricted aircraft, N_ es, for this stream, N_ +e's = N des -NI (17) Subtracting N_ ed from Nun results in the number of aircraft, NtMinT , which enter the TRACON with the first stream restricted and the other streams unrestricted.If NtlViinT is below the desired count, Nde s, enough restrictions have been imposed and we move on to the refinement scheduler.If NtMinT still exceeds Nde s, restrict the next stream (that which is more dense).This continues until all streams have been checked, or the scheduled count is below the desired count, Nde s, N;ed=_N?aX-Nj
....... :...................
t ................. _.............. :. ............ ........ 1 ............... i. ,.,.,::...l ............... i.............. J............ .... _...._.......... :........... :..,.'..t ......... .:............... i.............. .;............ ....+.__i ........... .; ............ _.....:+ ......... ,: ............... !.............. ,: ............ -: ......... +_ ............... +'-----;+ ......... .+,............... +...........................MinT restriction limits.The steep line is the five nautical mile minimum separation limit.As aircraft arrive at feeder fix TOMSN they must be separated by at least five nautical miles, which corresponds to 60 seconds for jets which arrive at a speed of approximately 300 knots.The shallow line corresponds to a separation of 35 nautical miles.It is unlikely that TMCs issue restrictions of greater than 35 nautical miles between aircraft, for an aircraft can typically complete one revolution of a holding pattern in the time it takes to fly 35 nautical miles.i!i_ l,'iiiii ¢iii5 + 4++s + :I:::!;•tI:3:3-_ " ....:2----_-:i, :;ii0100020003000400050006000Figure 4. STA arrival rate graph.6....j_....J.
Table 1 .1... .. , .................. ; ............ Da[Tuu_,_, ...... _............ ,........... b----_ .......... _........... /--; ............... {-----.';'_'--'4-............................... _-----' .......... i----/_-'-:--'i" ............ tianarA#--....:......... :................ :.......................... ........ -!........... i............... : ..... ---" ................ !...... I%_-'-!............... i--'-......Figure 6. DIA Western ETA arrival rate graph............................ ...... i ................................................. /'--_............... i ....... -_----_ ..... i ......................................... :........... i............... ....--_::_¢._-.......... i............... i................ 7 Over the entire sampling period, the area under the ETA arrival rate curves, which relates to the ETA integral, is greater for Powdr_BC and Ramms_4 than it is for the other curves, indi-Scheduling results for DIA;',I;,'',J':I'/',!i_.'!i/ !i:I,' :II": :.'s .'si/..hi"LandrBC ://ii-".':: .........:;:,J:.-"..,:..-:"_,:!II ,4.-..... .;.:/::-_ .......... _................ ,_ .....::. ,_i::"_";_ ......_"-Tii ,//, .'S-"_iSaygeAi::,Vt_ .'_" I .......... :I::,' 11 _, I,I]:: : ............ :......... r'----_ /: " ' 9 .... ': i..............I :! ' _-.--IDa n dBC; .......: :." '_ , I i ..... "7 • ;_ ,..l.--f"-,,_i _:: :,/:r,...-'1-i,.(" -" ..'/,!!2--_ "'''!"" ' /!1_'00020003000400050006000time, secFigure 5. DIA Eastern ETA arrival rate graph.WesternStreams14PowdrE]Cis_c"12__ ..-. ]_:. .7. ........... -:_ .............,RammsA/'10i,'. t/: !)" .:E ,_¢ _,',_:: :: / i /i:: .8.o, _'! --_---:---_., ,.. ' ,.......... _.--;y-........ -.---.-:-:_ ......... i .." TdmsnA_-'"O O'_h _--" :.7'1/'-" iPowarA._i ...... t_.d _7_._,_.':.U.I;';" garksA4r0msnBC_ ................ _-I , I ,i iIJ..........k-2-"...... [.......... "................ "............... !...... i _ i i :! : i0100020003000400050006000time, sec. :............................ _•............ bartddA--9 14 Western Streams these streams in figure 5.
table 1 ,1the reduction is achieved without restricting the three high density streams.The table listing is in ascending order of traffic density, as measured by the ETA integral, and thus represents the order in which restrictions were placed on the streams to meet the scheduling objective.
Table 2 .2Aircraft counts for Denver Trail (MinT) scheduling algorithm has been developed to aid a TMC in determining MinT restrictions on Center air traffic destined for arrival in a TRACON.The algorithm is effective in determining restrictionsDIA start 61 acStapleton start 28 acDesiredScheduledDesiredScheduled6O6O272659592626585825255757242456562324555522225454212253535252Count of 20 =5151all ac holdingCount of 50 =all ac holdingCONCLUSIONSA Miles-in-
		
		
			
Form Approved REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE OMBNoo7o4-o188Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
SUBJECT TERMSAir traffic management, Miles-in-trail, Scheduling			
			

				


	
		Concepts and Algorithms for Terminal-Area Traffic Management
		
			HErzberger
		
		
			JDChapel
		
		10.23919/acc.1984.4788371
	
	
		1984 American Control Conference
		San Diego, Calif
		
			IEEE
			1984
			
		
	
	Erzberger, H.; and Chapel, J. D.: Concepts and Algorithms for Terminal-Area traffic Man- agement. In Proc. of the American Con- trol Conference, San Diego, Calif., 1984, pp. 166-173.



	
		Ground based concept for time control of aircraft entering the terminal area
		
			HErzberger
		
		
			JChapel
		
		10.2514/6.1985-1888
	
	
		Guidance, Navigation and Control Conference
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			1986
			4
			
		
	
	Erzberger, H.; and Tobias, L.: A Time-Based Concept for Terminal Area Traffic Manage- ment. In Proc. of the 1986 AGARD Con- ference, 1986, pp. 52.1-52.4.



	
		Analysis of Delay-Reducing and Fuel Saving Sequencing and Spacing Algorithms for Arrival Traffic
		
			ENeuman
		
		
			HErzberger
		
		103880
		
			Moffett
		
		
			NASA Ames Research Center
		
	
	Technical Memorandum
	Neuman, E; and Erzberger, H.: Analysis of Delay-Reducing and Fuel Saving Sequenc- ing and Spacing Algorithms for Arrival Traffic. Technical Memorandum 103880, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett



	
		from-the-field-vol2-no2-oct-1991-4-pp
		
			CalifField
		
		10.1163/2210-7975_hrd-3562-0069
		
			Oct. 1991
			Brill
		
	
	Field, Calif., Oct. 1991.



	
		An implicit enumeration algorithm for arrival aircraft
		
			CRBrinton
		
		10.1109/dasc.1992.282145
	
	
		[1992] Proceedings IEEE/AIAA 11th Digital Avionics Systems Conference
		Seattle, Wash.
		
			IEEE
			Oct. 1993
		
	
	Brinton, C. R.: An Implicit Enumeration Algo- rithm for Arrival Aircraft Scheduling. In Proc. of the l lth Digital Avionics Systems Conference, Seattle, Wash., Oct. 1993.



	
		Design of Center-TRACON Automation System
		
			HErzberger
		
		
			TJDavis
		
		
			SGreen
		
	
	
		Proc. of the AGARD Guidance and Control Panel 56th Symposium on Machine Intelligence in Air
		of the AGARD Guidance and Control Panel 56th Symposium on Machine Intelligence in Air
		
	
	Erzberger, H.; Davis, T. J.; and Green, S.: Design of Center-TRACON Automation System. In Proc. of the AGARD Guidance and Control Panel 56th Symposium on Machine Intelli- gence in Air.


				
			
		
	
