
	
	
		
INTRODUCTIONAviation is responsible for 2% of all man-made carbon-dioxide (CO 2 ) emissions.Aircraft engines combine air and fuel to provide the thrust to propel the aircraft.The oxygen and nitrogen in the air together with the hydrocarbons and sulfur in the aviation fuel results in byproducts of combustion, which includes CO 2 , water vapor (H 2 O), oxides of nitrogen (NO x ), oxides of sulfur (SO x ), hydrocarbons and soot.The byproducts and their effect on the climate are illustrated in Fig. 1.CO 2 and water vapor directly affect the climate through their direct absorption and re-emission of infrared radiation.NO x is converted in the atmosphere by chemical reactions to methane (CH 4 ) and ozone (O 3 ).Water vapor emission reduces O 3 , whereas NO x increases it.Ozone affects the radiative balance through the absorption shortwave and infrared radiation.NO x emissions from the aircraft result in the reduction of methane in the atmosphere.The release of these products into the atmosphere causes a change in the amount of radiative force (RF) from these components resulting in climate change as measured in variations to the temperature, mean sea level, rainfall and other indicators.Interest in the effect of aircraft condensation trails or contrails on climate change has increased in recent years.Contrails form in the wake of aircraft for various reasons but the most important is the emission of water vapor 1 .They appear in the atmosphere along the aircraft's trajectory at high altitude where the ambient temperature is very low.Contrails persist in the region of atmosphere where the relative humidity with respect to ice is greater than 100% 2 .Contrails can lead to the formation of cirrus clouds having a radiative impact on the climate.A recent study 3 reports that persistent contrails may have a three to four times greater effect on the climate than CO 2 emissions.It is tempting to reroute aircraft to minimize the impact of persistent contrails on climate.This may result in longer travel times, more fuel usage and increased CO 2 emissions.However, the complete effect of persistent contrails on climate change is still not known as they have both negative and positive effects and the resulting net effect is uncertain.The uncertainty in the effect of persistent contrails on climate forcing requires a flight Several new operational strategies in air traffic management have been proposed that can potentially mitigate the impact of persistent contrails on climate change.These strategies include adjusting cruise altitude in real-time 4 and rerouting aircraft around regions of airspace that facilitate persistent contrails formation 5 .The study in Ref. 6 presents a methodology to optimally reroute aircraft trajectories to avoid the formation of persistent contrails with the use of mixed integer programming.However, the computational complexity is high for problems with many obstacles and dynamic constraints.None of the current methods for avoiding contrails [6][7] consider the effect of wind on the aircraft trajectory and therefore neglect the potential fuel savings that aircraft can gain when flying windoptimal routes.The emphasis in this paper is on the use of actual traffic data, contrail formation based on current and forecast weather data and contrail reduction strategies in the presence of winds.This study develops an algorithm to calculate a wind-optimal trajectory for cruising aircraft while avoiding the regions of airspace that facilitate persistent contrails formation.The computationally efficient optimal trajectory is derived by solving a non-linear optimal control problem with path constraints 8 .The regions of airspace favorable to persistent contrails formation are modeled as undesirable regions that aircraft should avoid and are formulated as soft state constraints.It is shown that the dynamical equation for aircraft optimal heading is reduced to the solution of the Zermelo problem 9 in the absence of constrained airspace regions.Section ΙΙ provides the model for diagnosing regions of airspace that are susceptible for persistent contrail formation.Section ΙΙΙ explains the optimal trajectory generation for cruising aircraft.Section IV describes the application of the trajectory optimization algorithm for calculating wind-optimal and contrailsavoidance routes.Section V considers the impact of uncertainty in weather models on the trade-off curves.Conclusions and future work are described in Section VI.
II. PERSISTENT CONTRAILS FORMATIONMODELS The formation of contrails has been under investigation since 1919 1 .According to Appleman 10 , contrails are clouds that form when a mixture of warm engine exhaust gases and cold ambient air reaches saturation with respect to water, forming liquid drops, which quickly freeze.Contrails form in the regions of airspace that have ambient Relative Humidity with respect to Water (RHw) greater than a critical value, € r contr 11 .Contrails can persist when the ambient air is supersaturated with respect to ice, that is the environmental Relative Humidity with respect to Ice (RHi) is greater than 100% 2 .In this study, the regions of airspace that have RHw greater than € r contr and RHi greater than 100% are considered favorable to persistent contrails formation.The studies in Refs.12-13 measure the validity of contrails formation by comparing them with satellite observation.There is general agreement between the satellite images and the persistent contrails regions predicted by the model.where€ G = EI H 2 O C p P εQ(1-η) . € EI H 2 O is the emission index ofwater vapor, and it is assumed to be 1.25;€ C p = 1004JKg -1 K -1 is the isobaric heat capacity of air, P (in Pa) is the ambient air pressure, ε = 0.6222 is the ratio of molecular masses of water and dry air, € Q = 43×10 6 JKg -1 is the specific combustion heat, and η = 0.3 is the average propulsion efficiency of the jet engine.The values of € r contr and RHi are computed using measurements from the Rapid Update Cycle (RUC).RUC is an operational weather prediction system developed by the National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) for users needing frequently updated short-range weather forecasts (e.g. the US aviation community).The horizontal resolution in RUC is 40-km.RUC data has 37 vertical isobaric pressure levels ranging between 100-1000mb in 25mb increments.The RUC produces short-range forecasts every hour.The value of € r contr is computed by Eqs (1, 2) using RUC measurements for RHw and temperatures.RUC does not provide measurements for RHi directly.Instead, RHi is calculated by the following formula 14 :€ RHi = RHw ⋅ 6.0612eNote that the numerator on the right hand side of Eq.(3) is the saturation vapor pressure over water
III. OPTIMAL HORIZONTAL TRAJECTORYAircraft trajectory optimization algorithms are well known and are solutions to two-point boundary value problems 9 .The various approximations to the solution of the two-point boundary value problems depend on the application, and are motivated by the desire to balance computation speed with accuracy.The cruise altitude of most commercial aircraft varies between 29,000 feet to 41,000 feet.Eastbound aircraft fly odd thousands of feet while westbound traffic fly even thousands of feet.The flight levels are separated by 2000 feet between two levels of flight in the same direction (1000 feet since the introduction of Reduced Vertical Separation Minima).As the choice of the cruise altitude varies over a small range, the optimal aircraft trajectories in this paper are computed by repeatedly solving the horizontal plane problem.This section develops the optimal trajectory algorithm for cruising aircraft.Section ΙΙΙ.A presents the aircraft model and outlines the procedures for calculating optimal aircraft heading on a plane.Section ΙΙΙ.C models persistent contrails formation as regions to be avoided by an aircraft and imposes a soft penalty for going through these regions.
A. Aircraft Model and Horizontal Trajectory GenerationThe equations of motion in the horizontal plane are€ ˙ x = V cosθ + u(x, y) (4) € ˙ y = V sinθ + v(x, y) (5) € ˙ m = -f (6)subject to the conditions that Th=D and flight path angle, γ=0, where
€x and € y are aircraft position in rectangular coordinates,€ V is airspeed, € θ is heading angle, € m is aircraft mass, € f is fuel flow rate, Th is thrust and D is drag.The x-component of the wind velocity is € u(x, y) , and the y-component of the wind velocity is € v(x, y) .The horizontal trajectory is optimized by determining the heading angle that minimizes a cost function and satisfies the physical system constraints.The cost function contains components that penalize travelling time, fuel burn, and flying through penalty areas 15 .The cost function is defined as€ J = 1 2 X T (t f )SX (t f ) + C t + C f f + C r r(x, y) { } t 0 t f ∫ dt, (7)where€ X = [ x y] T is the state vector, € S is the final state cost matrix, € C t is the cost coefficient of time, € C f is the cost coefficient of fuel, € f is fuel flow rate,
€C r is the cost coefficient of penalty areas, and € r(x, y) is the penalty function.Using the chain rule of differentiation on the final state penalty cost, the cost function is rewritten as€ J = [(SX (t)) T ˙ X (t) + C t + C f f t 0 t f ∫ + C r r(x, y)]dt (8)Pontryagin's Minimum Principle 9 is applied to determine the control input that minimizes the cost function.The heading angle, € θ , is the control available for aircraft during cruise.The Hamiltonian for this problem is defined as€ H = (SX (t)) T ˙ X (t) + C t + C f f + C r r(x, y) +λ x (V cosθ + u(x, y)) + λ y (V sinθ + v(x, y)) + λ m (-f )(9)€ H = s x x ˙ x + s y y ˙ y + C t + C f f + C r r(x, y) +λ x (V cosθ + u(x, y)) + λ y (V sinθ + v(x, y)) = C t + C f f + C r r(x, y) + (λ x + s x x)(V cosθ + u(x, y)) +(λ y + s y y)(V sinθ + v(x, y)). (10)For an extremum to exist, the optimal heading angle satisfies€ ∂H ∂θ = 0, t 0 ≤ t ≤ t f ⇒ (λ x + s x x) sinθ = (λ y + s y y) cosθ ⇒ tanθ = (λ y + s y y) (λ x + s x x) ,(11)and the necessary conditions for optimality are € H * = min{H }, in generalH * = 0, free terminal time, t f .(12)Solve Eqs.(10, 11) for the co-state parameters € λ x and λ y when the Hamiltonian is zero to obtain€ λ x = -(C t + C f f + C r r(x, y)) cosθ V + u(x, y) cosθ + v(x, y) sinθ -s x x (13) € λ y = -(C t + C f f + C r r(x, y)) sinθ V + u(x, y) cosθ + v(x, y) sinθ -s y y. (14)The co-state equations are€ ˙ λ x = - ∂H ∂x ⇒ -˙ λ x = C r ∂r(x, y) ∂x + (λ x + s x x)( ∂u(x, y) ∂x ) +s x (V cosθ + u(x, y)) + (λ y + s y y)( ∂v(x, y) ∂x ) (15) € ˙ λ y = - ∂H ∂y ⇒ -˙ λ y = C r ∂r(x, y) ∂y + (λ x + s x x)( ∂u(x, y) ∂y ) +(λ y + s y y)( ∂v(x, y) ∂y ) + s y (V sinθ + v(x, y)). (16)Equations (11,15,16) are known as the Euler-Lagrange equations.As shown in Ref. 17, the dynamical equation for the optimal aircraft heading is governed by Eqs.(11-17), and the heading angle, € θ , is the solution to the differential equation€ ˙ θ = (V + u(x, y) cosθ + v(x, y) sinθ ) (C t + C f f + C r r(x, y)) ⋅(-C r sinθ ∂r(x, y) ∂x + C r cosθ ∂r(x, y) ∂y ) + sin 2 θ ( ∂v(x, y) ∂x ) + sinθ cosθ ( ∂u(x, y) ∂x - ∂v(x, y) ∂y ) -cos 2 θ ( ∂u(x, y) ∂y ).(17)This equation reduces to the solution of Zermelo problem 9 when € C r = 0 .Solving the equations (4,5,17) provides the optimal path.The initial heading angle at € t 0 must be picked correctly for a particular origin and destination pair.This study applies the shooting method in Ref. 18 to find the initial aircraft heading.The great circle heading at the origin can be used to initialize the shooting method.
B. Aircraft Fuel Consumption ModelThis study applies the fuel consumption model in Eurocontrol's Base of Aircraft Data Revision 3.6 (BADA) 19 to compute cruising aircraft fuel consumption.The following equation calculates fuel burn for aircraft during cruise€ f = t ⋅ SFC ⋅Th
C. Contrails as Penalty AreasPersistent contrails are modeled using penalty functions as areas to be avoided by an aircraft to reduce the potential impact on climate.The penalty functions are used as a systematic way of generating aircraft trajectories that avoid the contrail formation areas by varying amount.The cost due to persistent contrails formation in the cost function is defined as€ J r = C r r(x, y)dt t 0 t f ∫ .The penalty function € r(x, y) is the penalties that an aircraft can encounter along the flight trajectory from the origin to destination.In general, there are multiple regions in the en-route airspace that favor persistent contrails formation.The penalty can be determined by one of the following functions:1. Radial penalty functions-€ r(x, y) = 1 d i i ∑ ,or(18)€ r(x, y) =1 d i 2 i ∑ ,(19)where € d i is distance between the aircraft and the center of € i th region that potentially form persistent contrails.The penalty function is set to zero if the aircraft is outside the penalty area.
⎧ ⎨ ⎩In this study, optimal trajectories will be generated using the penalty function defined in Eq. ( 19).In addition, there are many regions in the NAS that can potentially form persistent contrails.Some are far away from the aircraft and will not be encountered by the aircraft.Some are expected to be encountered, but the area is too large for aircraft to completely avoid.Identifying the right subset of contrails and avoiding the region by an appropriate level are important for policy makers to make operational decisions and trade-offs.IV. RESULTS This section presents results based on applying the optimal trajectory algorithm to calculate an aircraft trajectory in the presence of winds that avoids regions of airspace that facilitate persistent contrails formation.The trajectory computations are conducted using traffic and atmospheric data in the continental United States for May 24, 2007.The data for wind speed and direction are obtained from RUC.The blue, green and magenta polygons in Fig. 2 depict the areas at 37,000 feet above sea level in the U.S. national airspace where atmospheric conditions are favorable for persistent contrails formation at 6 a.m., 7a.m. and 8 a.m. EDT on May 24, 2007, respectively.The critical relative humidity and RHi values are computed using Eq.(1-3) with RHw values, pressure, and temperature data obtained from RUC. Figure 2 shows that the location, shape and size of potential contrail regions vary with time.
A. Chicago (O'Hare International Airport) to Washington (Dulles International Airport)The trajectory design in this example focuses on avoiding the potential contrails regions between Chicago and Washington D.C.At each altitude, C r is varied from zero to a value where the optimal trajectory completely avoids the contrail region.The time for the wind optimal route, the time through contrail regions, the value of C r to avoid contrails and the extra fuel consumption are computed at each altitude.This process is repeated at all six altitudes.Three optimal trajectories from Chicago O'Hare airport (ORD) to Washington Dulles airport (IAD) are shown in Fig. 3 for flights with cruising altitude equal to 37,000 feet.The cruising speed is assumed to be 420 nmi/hr (778 km/hr).The green arrows represent the wind directions, obtained from RUC, at 6 a.m. EDT on May 24, 2007.The arrow sizes are plotted in proportion to the wind magnitudes.The wind-optimal trajectory is generated using Eqs.(4, 5, 17) by setting C r = 0. Two optimal trajectories in addition to the wind-optimal route are also plotted in Fig. 3.The areas favorable to persistent contrails formation are surrounded by the blue polygons.The polygon with a red cross is identified as a potential penalty area to the aircraft and the red cross is the center of penalty area.The position of penalty centers and aircraft position are used in Eq. (19) to calculate the distance and the penalty cost.In this example, the cost coefficient of time is chosen as C k =20.The cost coefficient of penalty C r is equal to 0.5 and 2.0, respectively.Note that the penalty coefficient C r is treated as a design parameter.The choice of this parameter is not unique and depends on the definition of the penalty function itself.The optimal route with C r = 2.0 completely avoids the contrail polygons near the departure airport.The optimal route with C r =0.5 only partially avoids the polygons but is shorter.In this case, there is a trade-off between flying a shorter route with more persistent contrails formation versus flying a longer route with less persistent contrails formation.The performance of optimal trajectories is evaluated by investigating the total travel time and the time associated traveling through regions of persistent contrails formation.Optimal aircraft trajectories are generated for six different altitudes between 29,000 feet and 39,000 feet.Figure 4 shows the results for the six wind-optimal trajectories.The sum of blue and red bars represents the  total travel time for each trajectory, and the red bar represents the amount of time that a flight travels inside the regions of airspace favorable to persistent contrails formation.The wind-optimal trajectories at 29,000 ft, 31,000 ft, 33,000 ft, and 35,000 ft do not intercept any region of airspace that facilitates persistent contrails formation.The flights at these cruising altitudes should fly the wind-optimal trajectories that minimize fuel burn and emissions.Flying wind optimal trajectories at 37,000 ft and 39,000 ft will potentially cause persistent contrails formation.Optimal contrails-avoidance trajectories at these altitudes are generated by increasing the value of C r from 0 to 2 with increments equal to 0.1.The green columns in Table 1 show the value of C r, the total fuel consumption for the contrails-avoidance trajectory and the additional fuel burn compared to that of wind-optimal trajectory.The blue columns show the data for wind-optimal trajectories.Flying a contrailsavoidance trajectory requires 1.81% additional fuel burn at 37,000 feet and 39,000 feet, respectively, to avoid potentially 14 minutes and 5 minutes of persistent contrails formation.More optimal trajectories can be calculated with various choice of C r .It is interesting to compare the optimization results with a typical aircraft trajectory at 37,000 feet, shown in cyan color in Fig. 3, flown from ORD and IAD.The typical trajectory takes 4 minutes longer and consumes an additional 145 Kg of fuel compared to the optimal Table 1.Wind-optimal trajectories (in blue) versus contrails-avoidance trajectories (in green) from ORD to IAD.trajectory.However, the travel time through contrail regions is 5 minutes compared to the 14 minutes for the wind-optimal route.
B. Optimal Trajectories for 12 City PairsThis section analyzes the wind-optimal and contrails-avoidance trajectories for 12 origindestination pairs for a period of 24 hours starting from 6 a.m. EDT on May 24, 2007.The same city-pairs were used by the Federal Aviation Administration to assess the impact of implementation of Reduced Vertical Separation Minima (RVSM) on aircraft-related fuel burn and emissions 20 .This part of the study adapts the standard in RVSM and assumes that the cruising altitudes are between 29,000 and 41,000 feet.Figure 5 shows the wind-optimal trajectories for the eastbound flights at 37,000 feet at 6 a.m.EDT.Blue polygons depict the areas favorable to persistent contrails formation.The optimal aircraft trajectories are generated at the beginning of each hour on May 24, 2007 using hourly updated weather data from RUC. Six flight levels are considered for each direction of air traffic for each city pair.A group of 21 optimal aircraft trajectories are calculated for each flight level by increasing the value of € C r from 0 to 2 with increments equal to 0.1.The cost coefficient of time is chosen as € C t = 20 for each case.The cruising true airspeed is assumed to be 420 nmi/hr.The fuel consumption for each aircraft trajectory is calculated using BADA formulas by assuming that the aircraft are short to medium range jet airliners with medium weight.In each group, the additional fuel consumption of each optimal trajectory is obtained by comparing its fuel burned to that of its wind-optimal trajectory ( € C r = 0 ).The persistent contrails formation time associated to each trajectory is also recorded.A total of six bins are defined such that the aircraft trajectories can be categorized based on their additional fuel consumption.The first bin contains the windoptimal trajectory, which is the baseline for fuel use comparison and corresponds to trajectories that require no additional fuel consumption.The second bin contains aircraft trajectories consuming less than 2% additional fuel, the third bin contains those consuming between 2% to 4 % additional fuel, and etc.The sixth bin has trajectories that burn more than 8% of fuel.In each bin, the optimal trajectory that has least amount of persistent contrails formation time is selected to represent the bin.Note that there are six bins for each group of trajectories and six groups for each direction of air traffic every hour.The average persistent contrails formation time for the optimal trajectories are summarized in Table 2.The white column presents the average contrails formation time measured in minutes for the wind-optimal trajectories.The average is taken over six flight levels and a period of 24 hours for each direction.Flying wind-optimal routes on any of the six flight levels between Miami (MIA) and Newark, NY (EWR) or between Washington, DC (IAD) and MCO do not induce persistent contrails formation that day.The contrails formation time is less than a minute on average for the city pairs such as Minneapolis (MSP)-Detroit (DTW), Houston (IAH)-EWR, and Chicago (ORD)-MIA.The blue column presents the average contrails formation time for the optimal contrailsavoidance trajectories.These optimal trajectories consume different amounts of additional fuel at each bin or column.In general, the flights, which can afford more additional fuel burn, induce fewer contrails since they have more routes to choose from.The green column presents the average contrails formation time for the optimal contrails-avoidance trajectories on the optimized altitudes that produce least amount of contrails.The flights, which can select the flying altitudes, induce much fewer contrails given the same amount of extra fuel.The data in Table 2 can be converted into actual amount of extra fuel consumed by various flights and then can be aggregated to produce a simplified total extra fuel consumption versus total minutes through the contrail regions for all the flights between the 12 citypairs.This case is referred to as the baseline case.Figure 6 shows the curves with (green) and without (blue) altitude optimization.The figure shows, when altitude is optimized, a two percent increase in total fuel consumption can reduce the total travel times through contrail regions from 55 minutes to 16 minutes.Allowing further increase does not result in proportionate reduction in contrail travel times.Without altitude optimization, the reduction in contrail travel times is small with increase in total fuel consumption.The data in Table 2 can be used to develop optimal fleet allocation and scheduling strategies to minimize the travel time through contrails.
V. EFFECT OF UNCERTAINTIESThere are several uncertainties in developing tradeoff between persistence contrail times and additional fuel flow.A major source of error is the relative humidity values used to generate the contrail regions.The relative humidity values are provided by RUC weather models.It has been observed that numerical weather models underestimate humidity in the uppertropospheric regions 21 .NOAA has been improving the RUC models and the Rapid Refresh (RR) is the nextgeneration version of the system, planned to replace the current RUC by July-August 2011.underestimated, the trade-off curves computations for city-pairs are repeated by increasing the RHw values by 10%.The trade-off curves with 10% additional humidity is shown in (dotted lines) Figure 6.The amount of time wind optimal routes go through persistent contrail regions increases to 92 minutes from 55 minutes due to the changes in the contrail formation areas.As in the baseline case, use of altitude optimization results in a significant reduction of travel time through contrail regions from 92 minutes to 32 minutes by using only 2% extra fuel.Similarly, for horizontal maneuvers only, the decrease in travel time through contrail regions is small with extra fuel consumption.Although, the actual trade-off curves are different the trend observed in the baseline is maintained even in the presence of uncertainties in the contrail formation regions due to uncertainties of relative humidity values in weather forecast models.
VI. CONCLUSIONSThis study develops an algorithm to calculate windoptimal trajectories for aircraft while avoiding the regions of airspace that facilitate persistent contrails formation.The optimal trajectories are developed by solving a non-linear optimal control problem with path constraints.The operational strategies investigated in this study for minimizing aviation impacts on climate change include flying wind-optimal routes, avoiding complete or partial persistent contrails formation and altering cruising altitudes.The trade-off between persistent contrails formation and additional fuel consumption is investigated for 12 city-pairs in the continental United States.When both horizontal maneuvers and altitude are optimized, a 2% increase in total fuel consumption can reduce the total travel times through contrail regions by more than 70%.Allowing a further increase in fuel consumption does not seem to result in a proportionate decrease in contrail travel times.Without altitude optimization, the reduction in contrail travel times is small with an increase in total fuel consumption.The trade-off curves maintain similar behavior even in the presence of uncertainties in modeling contrail regions.The results in this paper were based on traffic for a single day and used the same type of aircraft on all routes.The results are being modified using the complete traffic and weather data for extended periods of time to get a better understanding of the complex relation between fuel efficiency and contrail reduction.CO 2 emissions are directly proportional to the amount of fuel used during a flight.The cost function in the trajectory optimization has to be modified to include the effect of NO x emissions as the amount of emission for a unit amount of fuel varies with altitude and ambient conditions.An important product resulting from this research is the development of an integrated capability combining traffic flow management concepts with both CO 2 and non-CO 2 emissions.Policy and better understanding of the tradeoff between emissions and the contrail minutes and impact on the climate through  the use of RF functions need to be developed to fully utilize this new capability.Alternatively, the optimization results can be used as inputs to global climate modeling tools like the FAA's Aviation environmental Portfolio Management Tool for Impacts 22 .Figure 1 .1Figure 1.Aviation emissions and their impact on climate trajectory optimization algorithm with fuel and contrails models that can develop alternative flight paths to enable trade-off between persistent contrails mitigation and fuel consumption for policy makers to set acceptable aviation operation guidelines.
denoted as AERW(50, -80) in Ref.14  and the denominator is the saturation vapor pressure over ice from the model denoted as AERWi(0, -80) in Ref.14.
where € λ x ,λ y, and λ m are the co-state parameters.The study in Ref.16 determined the value of € λ m to be negligible during the cruise portion of flight for transport-class aircraft.If € S is a diagonal matrix and € s x and s y are the diagonal elements associated to the final position in € x and € y coordinates, the Hamiltonian for the reduced-order model is formulated as
€Th is thrust, and € SFC is the specific fuel consumption.At a given altitude and airspeed, the fuel flow is a constant.Thus, the factor€ C t + C f f inequation 17 is a constant and can be replaced by a single parameter € C k .
2 .2Uniform penalty function-€ r(x, y) = Constant Aircraft in penalty area, 0 Otherwise.
Figure 2 .2Figure 2. Regions of airspace at 37,000 feet where favorable to persistent contrails formation at 6 a.m., 7 a.m., and 8 a.m. on May 24, 2007.
Figure 3 .3Figure 3. Optimal trajectories at 37,000 feet from ORD to IAD with different design parameters.
Figure 4 .4Figure 4. Travel time for the wind-optimal routes from ORD to IAD and length of periods favorable to persistent contrails formation at 6 different altitudes.
Figure 5 .5Figure 5.The wind-optimal trajectories for the eastbound flights for 12 city pairs on 37,000 feet at 6 a.m. EDT on May 24, 2007.
Figure 7 shows relative humidity contours (top figure) using the RUC model and the corresponding contours (bottom figure) using the RR version of RUC.For a given latitude and longitude, the humidity values are different in the two versions and the humidity values are indicated by the vertical color bar.Further, the figure shows the regions where conditions are present for persistent contrail formation as regions enclosed by magenta color.Assuming RHw values in RUC models are
Figure 7 .7Figure 7. Relative humidity with respect to water (RHW) and contrail regions from RUC (top) and the RR version (bottom).
Figure 6 .6Figure 6.Trade-off curves between fuel consumption and contrail avoidance.
Table 2 . Average persistent contrails formation time (minutes) for the optimal aircraft trajectories for the 12 cities on May 24, 2007.2
		
		
			
AUTHORS' BIOGRAPHIES			
			

				


	
		On Conditions for Contrail Formation from Aircraft Exhausts
		
			USchumann
		
	
	
		Meteor. Z., N. F
		
			5
			
			1996
		
	
	Schumann, U., 1996: On Conditions for Contrail Formation from Aircraft Exhausts. Meteor. Z., N. F. 5, 3-22.



	
		CONUS Contrail Frequency Estimated from RUC and Flight Track Data
		
			DPDuda
		
		
			PMinnis
		
		
			PKCostulis
		
		
			RPalikonda
		
	
	
		European Conference on Aviation, Atmosphere, and Climate
		Germany
		
			June-July, 2003
		
		
			Friedrichschafen at Lake Constance
		
	
	Duda, D.P., Minnis, P., Costulis, P.K., and Palikonda, R. "CONUS Contrail Frequency Estimated from RUC and Flight Track Data," European Conference on Aviation, Atmosphere, and Climate, Friedrichschafen at Lake Constance, Germany, June-July, 2003.



	
		
			IWaitz
		
		
			JTownsend
		
		
			JCutcher-Gershenfeld
		
		
			EGreitzer
		
		
			JKerrebrock
		
	
	
		Report to the United States Congress: Aviation and the Environment, A National Vision, Framework for Goals and Recommended Actions. Partnership for Air Transportation Noise and Emissions Reduction
		Cambridge, MA
		
			2004
		
	
	Waitz, I., Townsend, J., Cutcher-Gershenfeld, J., Greitzer, E., and Kerrebrock, J. Report to the United States Congress: Aviation and the Environment, A National Vision, Framework for Goals and Recommended Actions. Partnership for Air Transportation Noise and Emissions Reduction, MIT, Cambridge, MA, 2004.



	
		Assessment of a Global Contrail Modeling Method and Operational Strategies for Contrail Mitigation
		
			KKlima
		
	
	
		MIT
		
			2005
		
	
	M.S. Thesis
	Klima, K., "Assessment of a Global Contrail Modeling Method and Operational Strategies for Contrail Mitigation," M.S. Thesis, MIT, 2005.



	
		A Note on How to Avoid Contrail Cirrus
		
			HMannstein
		
		
			PSpichtinger
		
		
			KGierens
		
	
	
		Transportation Research Part D
		
			10
			5
			
			2005
		
	
	Mannstein, H., Spichtinger, P., and Gierens, K., "A Note on How to Avoid Contrail Cirrus," Transportation Research Part D, Vol. 10, No. 5, 2005, pp. 421-426.



	
		An Optimal Strategy for Persistent Contrail Avoidance
		
			SECampbell
		
		
			NANeogi
		
		
			MBBragg
		
	
	
		AIAA 2008-6515, AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference
		Honolulu, Hawaii
		
			2008
		
	
	Campbell S.E., Neogi, N. A., and Bragg, M. B., "An Optimal Strategy for Persistent Contrail Avoidance," AIAA 2008-6515, AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference, Honolulu, Hawaii, 2008.



	
		A Review of Various Strategies for Contrail Avoidance
		
			KGierens
		
		
			LLim
		
		
			KEleftheratos
		
	
	
		The Open Atmosphere Science Journal
		
			2
			
			2008
		
	
	Gierens K., Lim, L. and Eleftheratos K. "A Review of Various Strategies for Contrail Avoidance," The Open Atmosphere Science Journal, 2, 1-7, 2008.



	
		Singular Perturbations and Time Scales in Guidance and Control of Aerospace Systems: A Survey
		
			DSNaidu
		
		
			AJCalise
		
	
	
		AIAA Journal of Guidance, Control and Dynamics
		
			24
			6
			
			Nov.-Dec., 2001
		
	
	Naidu, D. S., and Calise, A. J., "Singular Perturbations and Time Scales in Guidance and Control of Aerospace Systems: A Survey," AIAA Journal of Guidance, Control and Dynamics, Vol. 24, No. 6, pp. 1057-1078, Nov.-Dec., 2001.



	
		Applied Optimal Control, Taylor and Francis
		
			AEBryson
		
		
			YCHo
		
		
			1975
			Levittown, PA
		
	
	Bryson, A. E., and Ho, Y. C., Applied Optimal Control, Taylor and Francis, Levittown, PA, 1975.



	
		The Formation of Exhaust Condensation Trails by Jet Aircraft
		
			HAppleman
		
	
	
		Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc
		
			34
			
			1953
		
	
	Appleman, H., 1953: The Formation of Exhaust Condensation Trails by Jet Aircraft. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., Vol. 34, 14- 20.



	
		
			MPonater
		
		
			SMarquart
		
		
			RSausen
		
	
	
		Contrails in Comprehensive Global Climate Model: Parameterization and Radiative Forcing Results
		
			2002
			107
		
	
	Ponater, M., Marquart, S., and Sausen, R., "Contrails in Comprehensive Global Climate Model: Parameterization and Radiative Forcing Results," Journal of Geophysical Research, 107(D13), 2002.



	
		A Satellite-Based Climate Description of Jet Aircraft Contrails and Associations with Atmospheric Conditions, 1977-79
		
			JQDegrand
		
		
			AMCarleton
		
		
			DJTravis
		
		
			PJLamb
		
	
	
		Journal of Applied Meteorology
		
			39
			
		
	
	Degrand J. Q., Carleton, A. M., Travis D. J., and Lamb, P. J., "A Satellite-Based Climate Description of Jet Aircraft Contrails and Associations with Atmospheric Conditions, 1977-79," Journal of Applied Meteorology, Vol. 39, pp. 1434- 1459.



	
		Contrail Coverage Derived from 2001 AVHRR Data Over the Continental United States of America and Surrounding Areas
		
			RPalikonda
		
		
			PMinnis
		
		
			DPDuda
		
		
			HMannstein
		
	
	
		Meteorologische Zeitschrift
		
			14
			4
			
			August 2005
		
	
	Palikonda R., Minnis P., Duda, D.P., and Mannstein H., "Contrail Coverage Derived from 2001 AVHRR Data Over the Continental United States of America and Surrounding Areas," Meteorologische Zeitschrift, Vol. 14, No. 4, 525-536, August 2005.



	
		Improved Magnus form Approximation of Saturation Vapor Pressure
		
			OAAlduchov
		
		
			REEskridge
		
	
	
		Journal of Applied Meteorology
		
			35
			
		
	
	Alduchov, O. A., and R.E. Eskridge, "Improved Magnus form Approximation of Saturation Vapor Pressure," Journal of Applied Meteorology, Vol. 35, 601-609.



	
		Trajectory Optimization with risk Minimization for Military Aircraft
		
			JLVian
		
		
			JRMoore
		
	
	
		J. Guidance
		
			12
			May-June 1989
		
	
	Vian, J. L., and Moore, J. R., "Trajectory Optimization with risk Minimization for Military Aircraft," J. Guidance, Vol. 12, No., 3, May-June 1989.



	
		Fuel-Optimal Aircraft Trajectories with Fixed Arrival Times
		
			JWBurrows
		
	
	
		AIAA Journal of Guidance, Control., and Dynamics
		
			6
			
			Jan.-Feb. 1983
		
	
	Burrows, J. W., "Fuel-Optimal Aircraft Trajectories with Fixed Arrival Times," AIAA Journal of Guidance, Control., and Dynamics, Vol. 6, Jan.-Feb. 1983, pp. 14-19.



	
		
			WilliamHPress
		
		
			SaulATeukolsky
		
		
			WilliamTVetterling
		
		
			BrianPFlannery
		
		Numerical Recipes in C: The Art of Scientific Computing
		Cambridge, England
		
			Cambridge University Press
			1992
			2
			17
		
	
	nd ed.
	Press, William H., Teukolsky, Saul A., Vetterling, William T., and Flannery, Brian P., Numerical Recipes in C: The Art of Scientific Computing, 2nd ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1992, Chapter 17.



	
		Aircraft Trajectory Optimization and Contrails Avoidance in the Presence of Winds
		
			BSridhar
		
		
			HokKNg
		
		
			NeilYChen
		
	
	
		ATIO Conference
		Fort Worth, TX
		
			September 2010
		
	
	Sridhar, B., Ng, Hok K., and Chen, Neil Y., "Aircraft Traject- ory Optimization and Contrails Avoidance in the Presence of Winds," ATIO Conference, September 2010, Fort Worth, TX.



	
		User Manual for the Base of Aircraft Data (BADA)
		No. 10/04. Project ACE-C-E2
	
	
		EEC Note
		
			Eurocontrol Experimental Center (EEC)
			September 2004
		
	
	Revision 3.6
	Eurocontrol Experimental Center (EEC). "User Manual for the Base of Aircraft Data (BADA), Revision 3.6." EEC Note No. 10/04. Project ACE-C-E2. September 2004.



	
		
			Cdm/DrvsmWork
		
		
			GroupReport
		
	
	
		Benefit Analysis and Report for Domestic Reduced Vertical Separation Minimum (DRVSM)
		FAA Air Traffic Organization System Operations Services
		
			September 2005
		
	
	CDM/DRVSM Work Group Report, "Benefit Analysis and Report for Domestic Reduced Vertical Separation Minimum (DRVSM)," FAA Air Traffic Organization System Operations Services, September 2005.



	
		Relating Observations of Contrail Persistence to Numerical Weather Analysis Output
		
			DPDuda
		
		
			RPalikonda
		
		
			PMinnis
		
	
	
		Atmos. Chem. Phys
		
			9
			
			2009
		
	
	Duda, D. P., Palikonda, R. and Minnis,P., " Relating Observa- tions of Contrail Persistence to Numerical Weather Analysis Output," Atmos. Chem. Phys., Vol. 9, 1357-1364, 2009.



	
		
			ICAO Committee on Aviation Environmental Protection
		
		Aviation Environmental Portfolio Management Tool (APMT) prototype, TG2-Meeting
		Tucson, AZ
		
			February 2006
		
	
	ICAO Committee on Aviation Environmental Protection, Aviation Environmental Portfolio Management Tool (APMT) prototype, TG2-Meeting, Tucson, AZ, February 2006.


				
			
		
	
