
	
	
		
I. IntroductionOver the past several decades, the demand for air travel has increased.The National Airspace System (NAS) has evolved with modest advances in weather/wind prediction, faster and quieter airplanes, and by adding new runways and technologies at airports.Each small step plays a part in the attempt to minimize delay as demand continues to grow.However, current technology is fast approaching the point of diminishing returns.New airspace operational concepts will be necessary to reverse this imbalance.These conceptual changes may affect the entire NAS in unpredictable ways.The Airspace Concept Evaluation System (ACES) is a NAS-wide fast-time simulation developed at NASA Ames Research Center.ACES simulates a model of the NAS with interacting agents for center control, terminal flow management, airports, individual flights, and other NAS elements.These agents pass messages between one another similar to real world communications.This distributed agent based system is designed to emulate the highly unpredictable nature of the NAS, making it a suitable tool to evaluate envisioned airspace concepts.Before new concepts can be evaluated, the tool must be used to evaluate the current NAS situation.This will lead to the development of processes that attempt to better understand the interdependencies between elements making up the NAS.Through these processes, the cascading effects that interdependencies produce on the system can be better understood.As a first step, this study was performed to establish an initial characterization of NAS-wide delay.The goal was to use ACES to simulate a variety of demand and capacity scenarios in the NAS to quantitatively establish their effects on system-wide delay.The study included thirty-six simulations, each encompassing a 24-hour demand period.The simulations varied in flight demand and airport operational capacity.Four flight demand cases were studied which included a representation of current-day 2002, an approximate doubling of current-day 2002, and two intermediate flight demand schedules.All cases included domestic commercial passenger flights operating between the top 98 US airports.Capacity was varied with nine cases representing different airport operational capacities.Two cases represented optimum and worst-case airport states.All airports operated under visual flight rules (VFR) during the simulation period for the optimum case.For the worst case, the 30 benchmark airports 8 operated under instrument flight rules (IFR) during the simulation period.The remaining seven intermediate days represented airport operational conditions from historic weather days.Delays for each segment of flight were determined and mapped against demand and capacity.The resulting surface provides a quantification of the effect that demand and capacity have on NAS delay.
II. ACES EnvironmentACES simulates the NAS using individual models for each of the communicating agents within the system.Examples of agents include System Command Center, Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC), and Terminal Radar Approach Control (TRACON).ACES is different from other NAS simulation tools in that it can simulate and record all communications between agents for post analysis.ACES Build 1.2 is the first working version of ACES.This build emphasizes the assembly of an agentbased framework with lower emphasis on developing high-fidelity agent models.Models or functionality which are absent in this current version of ACES include: 1) sector capacity limits, 2) separation constraints, 3) flight plan rerouting, 4) delay in the arrival terminal area and arrival surface, and 5) en-route altitude and cruise speed changes.Additional and enhanced models and improved functionality in these areas are under current development.Two options that are available in ACES Build 1.2 are delay maneuvers and TRACON departure fix separation.Delay maneuvers are lateral en route course alterations used to delay individual flights.The TRACON departure fix separation option provides a simulation of miles-in-trail separation of aircraft at each departure fix.
III. Demand VariationDemand is defined as the number of flights flown in the simulation.It is primarily dependant on the flight data set, which is a list of scheduled flight plans for the simulation.Each flight plan includes departure and arrival airports, cruise altitude and speed, a planned trajectory specified as an array of latitude/longitude coordinates, and scheduled departure time.Each flight is individually flown unconstrained between origin and destination airports during ACES configuration.This establishes the scheduled take-off, landing and gate arrival times.Although no flights are cancelled, not all flight plans are loaded and flown in the simulation.ACES rejects and filters out flights during configuration.Reasons why ACES rejects flights include: 1) when the origin and destination airports are the same, 2) sector boundary definition errors resulting in flights passing through undefined airspace, 3) inadequate number of way points in planned trajectories, and 4) distance between consecutive way points exceeds a pre-defined value.Two flight data sets were readily available for this characterization study.The first was a current-daydemand constructed from recorded traffic for May 17, 2002. 1 The second data approximately doubled the current-day traffic.This data set was developed as a future demand representing a nominal day in the year 2020. 2 The two data sets included domestic commercial passenger flights between pairs of airports within the continental United States' top ninety-eight airports.At run-time, ACES loaded 16,468 flights for the current-day demand set, and 33,186 flights for the future demand set.Intermediate flight data sets were created by filtering flights from the future data set while maintaining similar flight distributions.Let T(A, Q) and L(A, Q) be matrices containing the number of flights scheduled to takeoff and land at airport A at quarter hour Q from the start of the simulation.Let α be the reduction ratio desired.Then T r (A, Q) = αT(A, Q) and L r (A, Q) = αL(A, Q) become the matrices of the number of flights that must be removed per airport per quarter hour to reduce the data set by α.For each flight, let A t and A l be the takeoff and arrival airport.Let Q t and Q l be the scheduled takeoff and landing quarter hours from the start of the simulation.The flight filtering algorithm is as follows.For each loaded flight in the future demand data set:If (T r (A t , Q t ) > 0.5) and (L r (A l , Q l ) > 0.5) :Remove flight and decrement T r (A t , Q t ) and L r (A l , Q l ) by 1 Else:Add flight to new data set.Two intermediate data sets were reduced from the future demand data set with α = 1 6 and α = 1 3 .At run-time ACES loaded 25,597 and 20,461 flights respectively from these intermediate data sets.These data sets combined with the current demand and future demand provided 4 equally distributed variations of demand with similar flight distributions.Figure 1 shows the flight distributions for San Francisco International Airport (SFO) as a running average of scheduled takeoffs and landings per quarter hour starting at midnight Greenwich Mean Time (GMT).It is apparent from the figure that the defined filtering algorithm produced two intermediate demand data sets with similar distributions to that of the future demand set.These three distributions also compare favorably with the current-day demand distribution.
IV. Capacity VariationCapacity has been defined in many ways.En-route capacity has been defined as a function of the total number of aircraft under track control in a sector, average time of a flight in a sector, and ratio of total altitude changes to number of aircraft. 6Airport capacity has been defined as airport operations (arrivals, departures, or total) divided by throughput 7 or most commonly, as airport operations per unit time. 4,5 n all cases, capacity is defined for a single sector or airport.For the purpose of this analysis, a single capacity value encompassing the entire NAS is needed.This single capacity value must be independent of any one airport or region and independent of total demand or delay.The most appropriate NAS-wide capacity calulation that could be made using ACES Build 1.2 is a combined maximum airport capacity defined in terms of operations per quarter hour.ACES models each airport's state per quarter hour of run-time as either Visual Flight Rules (VFR) or Instrument Flight Rules (IFR).This operating state in turn defines the airport's capacity as the maximum number of departures, arrivals and total operations.A simple average of all airport capacities throughout the day would neglect the fact that demand is placed more heavily on some airports than others.Therefore, NAS capacity was calculated as a weighted average of airport capacities throughout the day across the scheduled demand distribution, and normalized by total demand D. The resulting NAS capacity is dependant on the demand distribution and not the total demand itself.NAS capacity units remain the number of operations per quarter hour just as with individual airport capacities.Let the matrices C d (A, Q), C a (A, Q), and C t (A, Q) contain the maximum airport capacities for departures, arrivals, and total operations for airport A at quarter hour Q from the start of the simulation.The respective NAS capacity measurements are given asC N ASa = 1 D L(A, Q) • C a (A, Q) (1) C N ASd = 1 D T(A, Q) • C d (A, Q) (2) C N ASt = 1 2D (L(A, Q) + T(A, Q)) • C t (A, Q) (3)where T(A, Q) and L(A, Q) are the takeoff and landing distribution matrices defined in section III.The variation of each airport's state throughout the day can be used to emulate the effects of terminal area weather.These variations affect airport capacity and therefore NAS capacity.Higher NAS capacity values result when the majority of airports are operating in VFR conditions during most of the day.Lower NAS capacity values result when IFR conditions occur more often.The greatest NAS capacity for a given demand results when all airports are in VFR conditions all day.A worst case low capacity day was defined as a day when the top 30 continental airports are in IFR conditions all day.Intermediate NAS capacities were calculated using airport state conditions taken from Aircraft System Performance Metrics (ASPM) analysis weather reports for various historical days.A report by Metron Aviation provided convenient access to this data for 7 different days. 3Three of these days were reported as low weather days.The remaining four were reported as days where weather affected delay.Since the simulations are based on the top 98 continental airports, and ASPM reports provide airport state data for only the top 49, the remaining airports were always assumed to be in a VFR state.
V. Delay CalculationsACES can collect all messages between its various agents, but only aircraft state messages were necessary for this analysis.The aircraft state message for each flight includes the origin and destination airports, and the scheduled and actual simulation times for gate departure, takeoff, landing, and gate arrival.For each flight, let t d , t t , t l , and t a define the actual gate departure, takeoff, landing, and gate arrival times.Similarly, let t ds , t ts , t ls , and t as define the scheduled times.Delay can be attributed to departure delay d d , takeoff surface delay d t , enroute delay d l , or landing surface delay d a .The sum of these is total delay d total .The following are the calculations for each delay element.Figure 2 shows a graphical representation of how delay is attributed to the various stages of flight.As stated earlier, arrival surface delay d a is not currently modelled and will be zero for every flight.d d = t d -t ds (4) d t = (t t -t ts ) -d d (5) d l = (t l -t ls ) -d d -d t (6) d a = (t a -t as ) -d d -d t -d l (7) d total = d d + d t + d l + d a (8)
VI. ResultsA total of 36 simulations were run across the 4 demand sets and 9 weather days (see Figure 3(a)).The incurred departure delay, as a percentage of total delay, increases significantly from approximately 0% to 30% as demand increases and capacity decreases.As a result of the departure delay increase, takeoff surface delay decreases from 70% to 45% and enroute delay decreases from 36% to 21%.As stated earlier, ACES Build 1.2 does not currently cancel flights.Every flight must complete its flight plan regardless of the delay incurred due to congestion.When demand exceeds capacity, flights are held at their gates, and departure delay increases more rapidly than either surface or enroute delay.Figure 4(a) shows a graph of demand and total NAS capacity for each weather day.The lines represent the average capacity for each weather day.The data points show the deviation of each capacity from the average.The averaged standard deviation of the NAS capacity values for all demand sets is 0.34 total operations per quarter hour.The averaged standard deviation of the NAS capacities for the three larger demand sets with similar flight distribution is 0.18 total operations per quarter hour.The averaged standard deviation is higher when the current demand data set is included because the NAS capacity calculation is dependent on the flight demand distribution.However, a clear distinction in NAS capacity can still be seen between the weather days.It is only for the 3 low weather days that current demand NAS capacity deviates enough to cross neighboring capacity days.When demand is compared to delay, quadratic curves produce the lowest and most random residuals; the values having a maximum of 0.32 minutes and an average of 0.05 minutes.Figure 4(b) shows what the delay surface looks like when demand data are interpolated using quadratic curves.Figure 5 shows comparisons of delay to capacity for each demand set.The data show a general linear However, as demand increases, nonlinearities in the data grow larger.This suggests that other factors are influencing the results.In general the days with higher delay than the linear trend have a majority of east coast airports in IFR state.The days with lower delay have very few east coast airports in IFR state.Therefore, regional concentrations of weather located in high traffic areas may be one source of these nonlinearities.
VII. ConclusionThis delay characterization study provides an initial quantification of the significant rise in delay experienced in the current NAS due to increasing demand.The results make a strong case for developing new airspace concepts that provide increased system capacity, and for continuing development of ACES, a NAS-wide simulation system, to assess their performance.Immediate future steps include a comparison of simulated ACES results to real world data, and an exploration of the effects of regional weather on the performance of the entire NAS.As ACES functionality increases, there we be limitless possibilities for exploring the interdependent and cascading effects that each element of the NAS has on the system as a whole.Figure 1 .1Figure 1.Takeoff and landing flight distributions at SFO for each demand data set.
Figure 2 .2Figure 2. Graphical representation of delay per stage of flight.
Delay results for 36 runs across 4 demand sets and 9 weather days.
Delay results are mapped to their respective weather days.
Figure 3 .3Figure 3. Delay surface results.
Figure 3 (3Figure 3(b) shows how the delay results correspond to their respective weather days as described in section IV.The all-VFR weather day provided the greatest NAS capacity and had the least delay.The top-30-IFR weather day resulted in the greatest delay and least capacity.The intermediate weather days, February 11, 2001, June 20, 2000, and July 12, 2001 were described as being low weather days.3They contributed little to delay in simulation.The data shows high NAS capacities and corresponding low NAS delays for these days.The remaining 4 intermediate weather days were characterized as days where weather contributed to delay.The data shows increasing delay with decreasing capacity, and more variability in the results for these days.
Demand vs. NAS Capacity for each weather day.
NA S ca pa cit y average delay (min) (b) Delay surface as a quadratic extrapolation with respect to demand.
Figure 4 .4Figure 4. Demand Analysis Results
Figure 5 .5Figure 5. Delay vs. Capacity
		
		
			

				


	
		KTG: A Fast-Time Kinematic Trajectory Generator for Modeling and Simulation of ATM Automation Concepts and NAS-wide System Level Analysis
		
			YingchuanZhang
		
		
			GoutamSatapathy
		
		
			VikramManikonda
		
		
			NikhilNigam
		
		10.2514/6.2010-8365
		NASA contract NAS2-00015
	
	
		AIAA Modeling and Simulation Technologies Conference
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			February 2003
		
	
	Creation of a Modeling and Simulation Capability to Support NAS-Wide Analysis of Advances ATM tools and Concepts. CTOD 7.19 Software Demonstration and Validation Report. NASA contract NAS2-00015. February 2003.



	
		Define Scenarios for Transportation Demand and Economic Analysis. NASA contract
		
			Lmi
		
		
			December 2003
		
	
	LMI, Define Scenarios for Transportation Demand and Economic Analysis. NASA contract. December 2003.



	
		Aggregate Statistics of the National Airspace System
		
			JimmyKrozel
		
		
			BobHoffman
		
		
			StevePenny
		
		
			TarynButler
		
		10.2514/6.2003-5710
	
	
		AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference and Exhibit
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			October 2002
		
	
	J. Krozel, B. Hoffman, S. Penny, and T. Butler. Selection of Datasets for NAS-Wide Simulation Validations. NASA contract RTO73. October 2002.



	
		National Airspace System demand and capacity modeling
		
			IFrolow
		
		
			JHSinnott
		
		10.1109/5.47724
	
	
		Proceedings of the IEEE
		Proc. IEEE
		0018-9219
		
			77
			11
			
			November 1989
			Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
		
	
	I. Frolow and J. Sinnott, National Airspace System Demand and Capacity Modeling. In Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 77, No. 11, November 1989.



	
		The Aviation System Analysis Capability Airport Capacity and Delay Models
		
			DLee
		
		
			CNelson
		
		
			GShapiro
		
	
	
		Logistics Management Institute
		
			April 1998
			McLean, Virginia
		
	
	D. Lee, C. Nelson, and G. Shapiro. The Aviation System Analysis Capability Airport Capacity and Delay Models. Logistics Management Institute, McLean, Virginia. April 1998.



	
		ARTS IIIA Terminal Baseline Research
		
			RMogford
		
		
			KAllendorfer
		
		
			JGalushka
		
		Report. DOT/FAA/CT-TN99/7
		
			April 1999
		
	
	R. Mogford, K. Allendorfer, and J. Galushka. ARTS IIIA Terminal Baseline Research Report. DOT/FAA/CT-TN99/7. April 1999.



	
		FAA Report on Airport Capacity; Volume I — National Summary. Office of Systems Engineering Management, Federal Aviation Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington, D.C. 20590. January 1974. Various paging
		
			CConner
		
		
			DRutishauser
		
		10.1177/004728757401300244
		
	
	
		Journal of Travel Research
		Journal of Travel Research
		0047-2875
		1552-6763
		
			13
			2
			
			August 2001. 2001. July 2004
			SAGE Publications
			Hampton, Virginia
		
	
	Airport Capacity Benchmark Report
	Department Of Transportation and Federal Aviation Administration
	C. O'Conner and D. Rutishauser. Enhanced Airport Capacity Through Safe, Dynamic Reductions in Aircraft Separation: NASA's Airctaft VOrtex Spacing System (AVOSS). Langely Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. August 2001. 8 Department Of Transportation and Federal Aviation Administration. Airport Capacity Benchmark Report 2001. http://www.faa.gov/events/benchmarks/. July 2004.


				
			
		
	
