
	
	
		
IntroductionThere is increased awareness of anthropogenic factors affecting climate change and urgency to slow the negative impact [1,2].Aviation operations affect the climate in several ways.CO 2, w ater vapor and other greenhouse gases are unavoidable by-product of the combustion of fossil fuel.The majority of the water vapor in the atmosphere is due to the evaporation of water.Transportation consumed 28% of the energy used in the US during 2008.It is estimated that aviation is responsible for 13% of transportation-related fossil fuel consumption and 2% of all anthropogenic CO 2 emissions.The emission of water vapor from the aircraft is small and may be of concern at higher altitudes.Nitric oxide and nitrogen oxide, commonly referred to as NO x , created by the high temperatures in the aircraft engines affect the environment indirectly by affecting the distributions of ozone and methane.Contrails appear in the atmosphere along the aircraft trajectory at higher altitudes if the location has the right atmospheric conditions.Persistent contrails appear if the relative humidity with respect to ice is greater than 100%.There is a large uncertainty in the understanding of the impact of aviation on climate change.However, this uncertainty is bigger in the case of contrails as they have both negative and positive effects and the resulting net effect is a difference between large error prone estimates of similar magnitude.It is suggested that emissions at cruise altitudes may have a larger impact than emissions on the surface.Expert panels have suggested focusing on the impacts of subsonic aviation emissions at cruise altitudes in the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere [2].It is likely that international treaties and legislation may lead to changes in aircraft operations.The complexity and uncertainty in the understanding of the various components of the climate equation requires models, analysis, optimization and validation at several levels.This paper develops a flexible air traffic simulation and optimization toolbox with fuel, emission and contrails models to develop the data needed by policy-makers to make acceptable aviation operation decisions.Section 2 describes the FACET air traffic simulation software and the interaction between simulation and optimization tools.Section 3 provides a brief description of the models for aircraft, wind, fuel flow, emissions, and contrail formation.It introduces a Contrail Frequency Index (CFI), a measure of severity of contrail formation based on nominal air traffic flow.Section 4 discusses the issues involved in contrails avoidance, describes two avoidance approaches and preliminary results with one involving only altitude changes and another based on three-dimensional optimal trajectories.Section 5 provides some concluding remarks.
Simulation and Optimization Environment
Future Air Traffic Management Concepts Evaluation Tool (FACET)FACET is a flexible software-based simulation environment for exploration, development, and evaluation of advanced Air Traffic Management (ATM) concepts [3].FACET models systemwide airspace operations over the contiguous United States.Airspace models (e.g., Center/sector boundaries, airways, locations of navigation aids and airports) are available from databases.Weather models (winds, temperature, severe weather cells, etc.) are also available.FACET models aircraft trajectories using spherical-earth equations.The aircraft can be flown along their routes as they climb, cruise, and descend according to their individual aircraft-type performance models.FACET software consists of four components: 1) algorithms, 2) databases, 3) graphical user interface (GUI), and, 4) applications.The algorithms use data from the databases and process the information needed by the applications, where each application supports one or many ATM concepts.The applications generate decision support data, which are displayed on the GUI.Unique features include simulation of air traffic over North America, traffic forecasting, data visualization, and playback of recorded data.Real-time aircraft position data and flight plan data are obtained from the FAA's Enhanced Traffic Management System traffic data feed; wind and temperature data are obtained from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) weather data feed.The data from the static databases and dynamic data feeds are used for parsing the flight plan route and constructing fourdimensional (4D) trajectories for the climb, cruise, and descent phases of flight according to the performance characteristics of the individual aircraft type.These 4D trajectories provide the engine that drives various ATM applications.FACET also provides extensive two and three dimensional visualization capabilities for display of data generated by various applications.The FACET GUI binds algorithms, databases, applications and visualization tools together.The software, data and visualization components interact with each other via drop-down menus available in the GUI.
Modifications to FACETAn Application Programming Interface (API) enables FACET to interface with analytical tools in MATLAB ® and large-scale optimization software such as CPLEX ® .The FACET software together with the API has been used to develop efficient traffic flow management algorithms [4][5].The FACET software has been further modified by the addition of contrails, fuel flow and emission models as shown in Fig. 1.
Models
AircraftAircraft are modeled as 3-dimensional point mass using an inertial reference system.The values of the parameters vary depending on the aircraft.The equations of motion can be defined by the equations:˙ x = V cosϕ cosγ + u(x, y) ˙ y = V sinϕ cosγ + v(x, y) ˙ E = (T -D)V /mg ˙ h = V sinγ ˙ γ = (L cosφ -mgcosγ) /mV ˙ ϕ = L sinφ /mV cosγ ˙ m = -σ (h,V,T)(1)where x is the downrange position, y is the cross track position, E is the energy height, h is the altitude, γ is the flight path angle, φ is the roll angle, ϕ is the heading angle, m is the aircraft mass, T is the aircraft thrust, D is the drag and V is the airspeed.The fuel flow σ is a function of thrust, altitude and air speed.u(x, y) and v(x, y) are the x-and y-components of the wind.
Atmospheric ModelsRapid Update Cycle (RUC), an operational weather prediction system developed by NOAA for users needing frequently updated short-range weather forecasts (e.g.US aviation community), provides the wind, temperature and humidity used in the atmospheric models [6].RUC provides wind and other atmospheric parameters in a grid using Lambert conformal conic projection coordinates.The grid is rectangular on this projection.The horizontal resolution in RUC varies from 40.6 km at 35 degrees N to 38 km at 43 degrees N and has an average grid size of 40-km.RUC data has 37 vertical isobaric pressure levels ranging between 100-1000 hPa in 25 hPa increments.Lambert coordinates can be easily converted into spherical coordinates using latitude and longitude using trigonometric formulas.RUC data is updated every hour and provides current wind, temperature, humidity and other atmospheric parameters and forecast of these parameters for the next 5 to 6 hours.The 40-km RUC data can be represented as a three-dimensional matrix € R(I,J,K) , where I=1,..113, J=1,..151, and K=1,..11, corresponding to the eleven pressure altitudes from 400 hPa to 150 hPa.The altitude level index K and the corresponding pressure level and flight level are listed in Table 1.As an example, snap shots of temperature and relative humidity with respect to water (RHw) contours at 8AM eastern daylight time (EDT) on August 1, 2007 at pressure altitude 250 hPa, or 34,057 feet, are shown in Fig. 2.
Fuel flow and emissionThis study uses the fuel consumption model developed for the FAA Aviation Environmental Design Tool [7] to compute cruising aircraft fuel consumption.This model refines Eurocontrol's Base of Aircraft DAta Revision 3.6 (BADA) [8] by taking into account the  variability of engine performance with meteorological conditions and throttle setting.The specific fuel consumption can be expressed as a function of Mach number, pressure, and aircraft related parameters.The following equation calculates fuel burn for aircraft during cruise€ f = t ⋅ SFC ⋅ T , (2)where f is the fuel burn, t is elapsed time, T is thrust, and SFC is the specific fuel consumption.
Contrails
Contrail formation modelThe formation of contrails has been under investigation since 1919 [9].According to Appleman [10], contrails are clouds that form when a mixture of warm engine exhaust gases and cold ambient air reaches saturation with respect to water, forming liquid drops, which quickly freeze.Contrails can persist when the ambient air is supersaturated with respect to ice i.e. the environmental relative humidity with respect to ice (RHi) is greater than 100% [11].In this study, the regions of airspace that have RHi greater than 100% are considered favorable to persistent contrails formation.The RHi is computed using measurements from the Rapid Update Cycle (RUC).RUC does not provide measurements for RHi directly.Instead, it has measurements for Relative Humidity with respect to water (RHw) and environmental temperatures.They are used to compute the RHi by the following formula, € RHi = RHw ⋅ 6.0612e 18.102⋅T /(249.52+T ) 6.1162e 22.577⋅T /(273.78+T )where T is temperature measured in Celsius.The numerator on the right hand side of Eq. ( 3) represents the saturation vapor pressure over water and vapor pressure over ice [12].Using Eq. ( 3) and the RUC data [11], it is possible to create a three-dimensional matrix € P(I,J,K) with zeros and ones indicating grid points where the conditions are unsuitable or suitable for contrail formation.Further, the RUC forecast permits the computation of predicted values of € P(I,J,K) for the next six hours.The continental United States is divided into twenty centers for air traffic operations.The potential persistent contrail coverage ratio of one center can be defined by the total of the contrail areas divided by the area of the center.As an example, the contrail area at flight level 341 at 8AM (EDT) on August 1, 2007 is shown in Fig. 3a.The corresponding center contrail coverage ratio is shown in Fig. 3b.The center contrail coverage ratio provides information whether contrail reduction is needed.In general, when the ratio is small, no action is needed.When the ratio is high, contrail reduction strategies may be needed.Persistent contrails can spread through the atmosphere due to winds to form cirrus-like clouds, which are indistinguishable from natural clouds.Another source of cloud formation is the particles containing black carbon, sulphate and organic compounds emitted by aircraft engines at cruise altitudes.The accumulation of these particles may act as nuclei for the formation of clouds.There have been studies to measure the validity of contrails formation by comparing them with satellite observation [13][14].As in the case of WITI, the index is affected more by the changing atmospheric conditions than by small daily variations to the nominal traffic plan.The Contrail Frequency Index of Center L, CFI(L,K), at altitude K is derived by summing it for all values of I and J which lie within the Center L.As an example, the center contrail frequencies at flight level 341 were computed at 8AM (EDT) on August 1, 2007 and are shown in Fig. 4a.Even though the contrail coverage ratio of Houston Center (ZHU) is higher than Atlanta Center (ZTL), as seen in Fig. 3b, the contrail frequency of Houston Center is zero.Figure 4b and4c show the aircraft locations and contrail areas of Houston and Atlanta Center.The small green dots indicate the aircraft trajectory.The contrail areas are shown in blue contours.The big red dots show the aircraft inside the contours, where persistent contrail occurs.As shown in the figures, Houston Center has larger contrail areas, but no aircraft flying through the contours, while there are more aircraft flying through the contours at Atlanta Center.The center contrail frequency is 0 in Houston Center and 109 in Atlanta Center.This example shows that the center contrail coverage ratio does not reflect the actual severity of contrail frequency in a center.The contrail frequency is a better indication of the severity of contrail formation.
PredictionInitially the ability to predict CFI at a given altitude for durations of one, two, three and six hours at all the centers is considered.Figure 5a shows the actual and predicted center contrail As shown in the figure, the one-hour predicted contrail index is highly correlated with the actual index, with a correlated coefficient of 0.97.The correlated coefficient between the actual index and the two-hour, three-hour, and six-hour predicted index are 0.84, 0.74, and 0.51, respectively.As noted earlier, the correlation coefficients are lower for longer prediction period due to the prediction accuracy of RUC models.Similar trends are seen in all the other 19 centers [17].The accuracy of the parameters provided by RUC varies with altitude.The humidity, RHW, is known to be underestimated at higher altitudes.The sensitivity of contrail regions can be computed with respect to errors in RUC parameters.
Contrail Avoidance StrategiesThe selection of strategies for contrail avoidance should be based on several different considerations.Although avoiding contrails is similar to re-routing aircraft in the presence of severe weather, which is done for the safety of the aircraft and its passengers, contrail avoidance is preventive action taken to reduce the impact of aviation on climate.Thus, contrails can be treated as a soft constraint in the avoidance problem.Using CFI or other metrics, the area to be avoided can be made a function of the severity of contrail formation in a particular region.Generally, avoiding contrails may result in extra fuel consumption and the associated increase in CO 2 emissions.Even without addressing the questions relating to congestion and other ATM factors resulting from the reroutes, one has to balance the long-term effect
SIMULATION AND OPTIMIZATION METHODS FOR ASSESSING THE IMPACT OF AVIATION OPERATIONS ON THE ENVIRONMENTof extra CO 2 emissions with the short-term effect of going through potential contrail formation areas.Thus it is necessary to develop a flexible, either partial or complete, avoidance approach that can create several options for avoiding all or some of the potential contrail formation areas.Several new operational strategies in air traffic management have been proposed that can potentially mitigate the impact of persistent contrails on climate change.These strategies include adjusting cruise altitude in real-time [18] and rerouting aircraft around region of airspace that facilitate persistent contrails formation [19].The study in Ref. 20 presents a methodology to optimally reroute aircraft trajectories to avoid the formation of persistent contrails with the use of mixed integer programming.However, the computational complexity is very high for problems with many obstacles and dynamic constraints.None of the current methods for avoiding contrails [20-21] consider the effect of wind on the aircraft trajectory and neglect the potential fuel savings that aircraft can gain when flying wind-optimal routes.The strategy for reducing the persistent contrail frequency in this paper is to minimize the overall environmental impact.Methods with minimum additional fuel utilization are preferred.The approach first selects a severity level for contrail formation.This determines contrail formation regions to avoid either partially or completely.Two different avoidance methods are used with one involving only altitude changes and another involving changes both to the altitude and route of the aircraft.
Altitude ChangesThe predicted contrail frequency index is used to identify the potential centers and flight levels with high contrail frequency.The cruise altitudes of this group of aircraft is moved up using airspace above it, while air traffic density below airspace capacity.Consider Atlanta Center at 8AM (EDT) on August 1, 2007, the center predicted contrail frequency index at different altitudes is shown in Fig. 6a.The altitudes shown in Fig. 6a are based on the RUC grid and can be easily converted into standard flight levels.As suggested in the figure, flight level 341 has the highest frequency index, thus was chosen as the level to be avoided.Figure 6b shows the one-hour simulation of contrail formations at Atlanta Center at 8AM (EDT).In the figure, all the light green dots disappear, which means that all the aircraft producing contrails at flight level 341 were eliminated.Since the contrail areas above fight level 341 were much smaller, the contrail frequencies were reduced.The total dots in the figure are 80.That is, with the avoidance strategy applied, the contrail formation frequency was reduced by 42.55%.
Optimal avoidance strategyAircraft trajectory optimization algorithms are well-known and are solutions to two-point boundary value problems [22].The various approximations to the solution of the two-point boundary value problems depend on the application, and are motivated by the desire to balance computation speed with accuracy.The cruise altitude of most aircraft varies between 29,000 feet to 41,000ft.The flight levels are separated by 2000 feet between two levels of flight in the same direction (1000 feet since the introduction of Reduced Vertical Separation Minimums).As the choice of the cruise altitude varies over a small range, the optimal aircraft trajectories in this paper are computed by repeatedly solving the horizontal plane problem.The equations of motion on the horizontal plane are€ ˙ x = V cosϕ + u(x, y) ˙ y = V sinϕ + v(x, y) ˙ m = -f (5)subject to the conditions that T=D and γ=0.The horizontal trajectory is optimized by determining the heading angle, ϕ, that minimizes a cost function and satisfies the physical system constraints.The cost function contains components that penalize travelling time, fuel burn, and flying through potential contrail formation area.The cost function is defined by€ J = 1 2 X T (t f )SX(t f ) + C t + C f f + C r r(x, y) { } t 0 t f ∫ dt, (6)where X is the state vector, X(t f ) is the final state cost matrix, C t is cost coefficient of time, C f is cost coefficient of fuel, f is fuel consumption rate, C r is cost coefficient of risk, and r(x,y) is contrail formation area at a given altitude.The application of optimal control theory results in a differential equation for ϕ.This section presents results based on applying the optimal trajectory algorithm [23] to calculate aircraft trajectory in the presence of winds that avoids regions of airspace that facilitate persistent contrail formation.The trade-off between fuel consumed and the amount of contrail avoidance is illustrated in terms of a flight from Chicago O'Hare Airport (ORD) to Newark Liberty Airport (EWR).The blue polygons in Fig. 7 depict the potential contrail formation areas at 34,100 feet above sea level in the NAS at 6:00 a.m. EDT on May 24, 2007.Each polygon with a red cross is identified as a potential risk to the aircraft and the red-cross is the risk center.The position of the risk centers and aircraft positions are used to calculate the distance and the risk.The green arrows represent the wind directions at 6 a.m. EDT based on RUC information.The arrow sizes are plotted in proportion to the wind magnitudes.The cruising speed is assumed to be 400 knots (741 km/hr) at an altitude of 34,100 feet.The wind-optimal trajectory from ORD to EWR is generated by ignoring the risk area with C r =0.Two optimal trajectories in addition to the wind-optimal route are also plotted in Fig. 7.In this example, the cost coefficient of time is chosen as C t =20 and the cost coefficients of risk are equal to 0.2 and 0.6, respectively.Note that the risk coefficient is treated as a design parameter.The choice of this parameter is not unique and depends on the definition of the risk itself.The optimal route, with C r =0.6, completely avoids the contrail polygons near the departure airport.The optimal route, with C r =0.2,only partially avoids the polygons but is shorter.Note that both routes travel through the green polygon surrounding the destination where aircraft start to land.In this case, there is a tradeoff between flying a shorter route with more persistent contrails formation versus flying a longer route with less persistent contrails formation.The performance of optimal trajectories is evaluated by investigating the total travel time and the time associated traveling through regions of persistent contrails formation.Optimal aircraft trajectories are generated for ten different altitudes between 28,000 feet and 52,000 feet (i.e.corresponds to the isobaric pressure level between 325 hPa and 100 hPa with 25 hPa increments).Figure 8 shows the results for the ten wind-optimal trajectories.The sum of blue and red bars represents the total travel time for each trajectory, and the red bar presents the length of periods that a flight travels inside the regions of airspace favorable to persistent contrails formation.The windoptimal trajectories at 28,300 ft, 41,400 ft, 44,400 ft, 47,800 ft and 51,900 ft do not intercept any region of airspace that facilitates persistent contrails formation.The flights at these cruising altitudes should fly the windoptimal trajectories that minimize fuel burn and emissions.Flying wind optimal trajectories at other altitudes between 30,000 ft and 39,000 ft will potentially cause persistent contrails formation.Increasing the value of C r from 0 to 2 with increments of 0.2 generates optimal contrails-avoidance trajectories at these altitudes.The green column in Table 2 shows the value of C r , the total travel time for the contrails-avoidance trajectory and the additional travel time compared to that of wind-optimal trajectory.The blue bars show the travel time for wind-optimal trajectories.The additional travel times ranged from 0 to 4.3 %.Flying contrails-avoidance trajectory requires very small additional travel time at 38,700 feet, and that avoids potentially three minutes of persistent contrails formation.Flying contrailsavoidance trajectory at 34,100 feet requires 4.3 % more travel time to avoid forming potentially 16 minutes of persistent contrails.More optimal trajectories can be calculated with various choice of C r .The optimal trajectory that minimizes climate change can then be determined when the relative severity of contrails and emissions on climate impact is known.An alternative strategy for the cruising flights to minimize climate impact can be altering the cruising altitude from 34,100 feet to the neighboring altitudes depending on the air traffic conditions.Generating and comparing these optimal trajectories at different flight altitudes provides policy-makers the necessary data to make tradeoffs between persistent contrails mitigation and fuel consumption.A more detailed analysis of the optimal aircraft contrail avoidance trajectories is presented in [23].
Concluding RemarksThe planning of air traffic schedules is a multi-dimensional optimization problem involving trade-offs between safety, capacity and efficiency.The recognition of the impact of aviation on the environment, together with the uncertainties associated with it, requires simulation and optimization tools to generate best operations policies towards sustainable aviation.This paper discusses some of the modeling, simulation and optimization issues associated with the problem.The contributions of the paper are (a) introduction of the concept of contrail frequency index, (b) prediction of the index using atmospheric data and (c) two methods for avoiding contrails that provide a trade-off between avoiding contrails (e.g., by reducing the contrail frequency index) and the amount of extra fuel consumption.The threedimensional avoidance methodology is illustrated with a flight originating in Chicago and heading to Newark.Additional results about the three-dimensional approach and the altitudeonly approach are presented in two companion papers [17,23].The software structure and the preliminary results presented in the paper can be used as building blocks for a more in-depth study of the impact of aviation on the environment.Fig 1 .1Fig 1. FACET interaction with optimization, emission and contrail models.
Fig 2 .2Fig 2. Contours of temperature and RHw at 250 hPa at 8AM (EDT) on August 1, 2007.
(a) Potential persistent contrail formation area (b) Coverage ratio
Fig 3 .3Fig 3. Potential persistent contrail formation area and coverage ratio at flight level 341 at 8AM (EDT) on August 1, 2007.
Fig 4 .4Fig 4. Aircraft location and potential persistent contrail formation areas at 8AM (EDT) on August 1, 2007.
Fig 5 .5Fig 5. Actual and predicted center contrail frequency index.
The color lines indicate contrail areas at different altitudes.The color dots indicate the aircraft flying through the contrail areas.Different colors mean different altitudes, from blue at flight level 236, to red at 444.There are total 188 dots in the figure, which is the center contrail frequency at all flight levels.When the avoidance strategy was applied, all the aircraft flying at and above flight level 341 were moved up one level.The simulation result is shown in Fig. 6c.
Fig 6.Predicted contrail frequency index and potential contrail formation area, with and without contrail reduction action, at flight level 341 at 8AM (EDT) on August 1, 2007.
Fig 7 .7Fig 7. Optimal trajectories with different design parameters from ORD to EWR.
Fig. 8 .8Fig. 8. Travel time for the wind-optimal routes from ORD to EWR and length of periods favorable to persistent contrails formation at 8 different altitudes.
Table 1 .1Altitude level index, isobaric pressure level, and flight level.Level indexpressure level (hPa)flight level (100 feet)1400236237525133502674325283530030162753207250341822536392003871017541411150444
		
		
			
SIMULATION AND OPTIMIZATION METHODS FOR ASSESSING THE IMPACT OF AVIATION OPERATIONS ON THE ENVIRONMENTOperations
Contact Author Email AddressBanavar.Sridhar@nasa.gov
Copyright StatementThe authors confirm that they, and/or their company or organization, hold copyright on all of the original material included in this paper.The authors also confirm that they have obtained permission, from the copyright holder of any third party material included in this paper, to publish it as part of their paper.The authors confirm that they give permission, or have obtained permission from the copyright holder of this paper, for the publication and distribution of this paper as part of the ICAS2010 proceedings or as individual off-prints from the proceedings.			
			

				


	
		Aviation and the global atmosphere, intergovernmental panel on climate change
		
			1999
			Cambridge University Press
			Cambridge, UK
		
	
	Aviation and the global atmosphere, intergovernmental panel on climate change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1999.



	
		NASA workshop on the impacts of aviation on climate change
		
			June 7-9, 2006
			Boston, MA
		
	
	NASA workshop on the impacts of aviation on climate change. June 7-9, 2006, Boston, MA.



	
		FACET: future ATM concepts evaluation tool
		
			KBilimoria
		
		
			BSridhar
		
		
			GChatterji
		
		
			KSheth
		
		
			SGrabbe
		
	
	
		Air Traffic Control Quarterly
		
			9
			1
			2001
		
	
	Bilimoria K, Sridhar B, Chatterji G, Sheth K and Grabbe S. FACET: future ATM concepts evaluation tool. Air Traffic Control Quarterly, Vol. 9, No. 1, 2001.



	
		Sequential traffic flow optimization with tactical flight control heuristics
		
			SGrabbe
		
		
			BSridhar
		
		
			AMukherjee
		
	
	
		AIAA Journal of Guidance, Control and Dynamics
		
			32
			3
			
			2009
		
	
	Grabbe S, Sridhar B, and Mukherjee A. Sequential traffic flow optimization with tactical flight control heuristics. AIAA Journal of Guidance, Control and Dynamics, Vol. 32, No. 3, pp. 810-820, 2009.



	
		Modeling and Optimization in Traffic Flow Management
		
			BSridhar
		
		
			SGrabbe
		
		
			AMukjerjee
		
	
	
		IEEE Proceedings
		
			January 2009
		
	
	Sridhar B, Grabbe S and Mukjerjee A. Modeling and Optimization in Traffic Flow Management. IEEE Proceedings, January 2009.



	
		An hourly assimilation-forecast cycle: the RUC
		
			GBenjamin
		
		
			DDevenyi
		
		
			S SWeygandt
		
		
			KJBrundage
		
		
			J MBrown
		
		
			GAGrell
		
		
			DKim
		
		
			BESchwartz
		
		
			TGSmirnova
		
		
			TSmith
		
		
			G SManikin
		
	
	
		Monthly Weather Review
		
			132
			2
			
			February 2004
		
	
	Benjamin S G, Devenyi D, Weygandt S S, Brundage K J, Brown J M, Grell G A, Kim D, Schwartz B E, Smirnova T G, Smith T L and Manikin G S. An hourly assimilation-forecast cycle: the RUC. Monthly Weather Review, Vol. 132, No. 2, 495-518, February 2004.



	
		Fuel consumption modeling in support of ATM environmental decision-making. 8 th USA
		
			DSenzig
		
		
			FlemingGIovinelli
		
		
			R
		
	
	
		Europe Air Traffic Management R&D Seminar
		
			June-July, 2009
			Napa, CA
		
	
	Senzig D, Fleming G and Iovinelli R. Fuel consumption modeling in support of ATM environmental decision-making. 8 th USA/Europe Air Traffic Management R&D Seminar, Napa, CA, June- July, 2009.



	
		User manual for the base of aircraft data (BADA), revision 3.6. EEC note
		No. 10/04. Project ACE-C-E2
		
			September 2004
			Eurocontrol experimental center (EEC)
		
	
	Eurocontrol experimental center (EEC). User manual for the base of aircraft data (BADA), revision 3.6. EEC note No. 10/04. Project ACE-C-E2. September 2004.



	
		On conditions for contrail formation from aircraft exhausts
		
			USchumann
		
	
	
		Meteor. Z., N. F
		
			5
			
			1996
		
	
	Schumann, U. On conditions for contrail formation from aircraft exhausts. Meteor. Z., N. F. 5, 3-22, 1996



	
		The formation of exhaust condensation trails by jet aircraft
		
			HAppleman
		
	
	
		Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc
		
			34
			
			1953
		
	
	Appleman H. The formation of exhaust condensation trails by jet aircraft. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 34, 14- 20, 1953.



	
		CONUS contrail frequency estimated from RUC and flight track data
		
			DDuda
		
		
			PMinnis
		
		
			PCostulis
		
		
			RPalikonda
		
	
	
		European Conference on Aviation, Atmosphere, and Climate, Friedrichschafen at Lake Constance
		Germany
		
			June-July, 2003
		
	
	Duda D, Minnis P, Costulis P and Palikonda R. CONUS contrail frequency estimated from RUC and flight track data. European Conference on Aviation, Atmosphere, and Climate, Friedrichschafen at Lake Constance, Germany, June-July, 2003.



	
		Improved magnus form approximation of saturation vapor pressure
		
			OAlduchov
		
		
			R EEskridge
		
	
	
		Journal of Applied Meteorology
		
			35
			
		
	
	Alduchov O A and Eskridge R E. Improved magnus form approximation of saturation vapor pressure. Journal of Applied Meteorology, Vol. 35, 601-609.



	
		A satellite-based climate description of jet aircraft contrails and associations with atmospheric conditions, 1977-79
		
			JQDegrand
		
		
			AMCarleton
		
		
			D J AndTravis
		
		
			P JLamb
		
	
	
		Journal of Applied Meteorology
		
			39
			
		
	
	Degrand J Q, Carleton A M, Travis D J and Lamb P J. A satellite-based climate description of jet aircraft contrails and associations with atmospheric conditions, 1977-79. Journal of Applied Meteorology, Vol. 39, pp. 1434-1459.



	
		Contrail coverage derived from 2001 AVHRR data over the continental United States of America and surrounding areas
		
			RPalikonda
		
		
			PMinnis
		
		
			DDuda
		
		
			HMannstein
		
	
	
		Meteorologische Zeitschrift
		
			14
			4
			
			August 2005
		
	
	Palikonda R, Minnis P, Duda D P and Mannstein H. Contrail coverage derived from 2001 AVHRR data over the continental United States of America and surrounding areas. Meteorologische Zeitschrift, Vol. 14, No. 4, 525-536, August 2005.



	
		Assessing NAS performance: normalizing for the effects of weather. 4th USA/Europe Air Traffic Management R&D Symposium
		
			MBCallaham
		
		
			JSDearmon
		
		
			ACooper
		
		
			J HGoodfriend
		
		
			Moch-Mooney
		
		
			DSolomos
		
		
			G
		
		
			December 2001
			Santa Fe, NM
		
	
	Callaham M B, DeArmon J S, Cooper A, Goodfriend J H, Moch-Mooney D and Solomos G. Assessing NAS performance: normalizing for the effects of weather. 4th USA/Europe Air Traffic Management R&D Symposium, Santa Fe, NM, December 2001.



	
		Relationship between weather, traffic and delay based on empirical methods. 6th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration and Table 2. Wind-optimal trajectories versus contrailsavoidance trajectories from ORD to EWR
		
			BSridhar
		
		
			SSwei
		
		
	
	Sridhar B and Swei S. Relationship between weather, traffic and delay based on empirical methods. 6th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration and Table 2. Wind-optimal trajectories versus contrails- avoidance trajectories from ORD to EWR.


				
			
		
	
