
	
	
		
IntroductionPerformance-Based Navigation (PBN) has introduced two types of navigation specifications, Area Navigation (RNAV) and Required Navigation Performance (RNP) [1].Benefits of PBN include shorter, more direct flight paths, fuel savings, a reduction in adverse environmental impact, and improved terminal area arrival rate [2,3].However, these benefits become less pronounced when aircraft are routinely interrupted from staying on the PBN procedures by following tactical air traffic control instructions such as heading change.The possible reasons for such interruption include the traffic density in busy terminal areas, as well as a lack of automation-aids for handling multiple types of procedures and the aircraft's navigational capabilities [4].Extensive research has been conducted to facilitate uninterrupted PBN arrival procedures.A precision scheduling and spacing system has been developed that generates an arrival schedule and provides a set of automation-aids to support the terminal area controllers in sequencing, spacing, merging aircraft and meeting the schedule [5,6].In 2013, NASA, the FAA, and MITRE's Center for Advanced Aviation System Development (CAASD) demonstrated this system's ability to enable the consistent use of PBN arrival procedures together with a high-throughput schedule, with multiple types of approaches and aircraft navigational capabilities [7,8].Data from this demonstration indicated that interruptions to PBN procedures occurred more often when the Scheduled Times of Arrival (STAs) were not met by the arrival aircraft precisely [9].As the research and development of scheduled PBN arrival operations progressed, impacts of disturbance events on the operations and the means to mitigate adverse effects from these events have been investigated.Recovery from disturbance events in the terminal area were studied with human-in-the-loop (HITL) experiments where manual schedule adjustments by a Traffic Management Coordinator (TMC), and alternative RNAV route assignments were available to the controllers to help return to nominal operation [10,11].The role of the TMC in busy arrival operations was investigated in [12,13] and the potential use of automation-aids to expedite recovery was investigated in [14,15].Research in [16] used multiple types of disturbance events to perturb the arrival schedule, where Estimated Times of Arrival (ETAs) were forcefully deviated from STAs due to the disturbances.Perturbed schedules were managed with different types of STA adjustments (schedule adjustments), including cases with no adjustments.A strong correlation between aggregated controller workload and aggregated schedule nonconformance (nc) was found.Results from [16] also showed benefits in using various types of schedule adjustments during PBN arrival operations for increasing system performance, such as reduced PBN procedure interruptions.Findings presented in this paper are intended to gain insights into the effects of scheduled PBN arrival operations on controller workload during disturbed operations, beyond the findings in [16].Perturbations in the schedule were compared with subjective workload at specific moments in time to analyze the impact of disturbance events on workload and assess system recovery based on type of schedule adjustment.
Method
ParticipantsThree sets of four Terminal Radar Approach Control (TRACON) air traffic controller positions (two Feeders and two Finals) and one Terminal Area TMC position were staffed during the simulation; one set per week for three weeks.During Week 1, participants took part in training the confederate pilots for simulating disturbance events and collecting data for baseline runs without disturbance events.Participants in Weeks 2 and 3 worked identical schedules of scenarios counterbalanced for schedule adjustment type and disturbance event.All TRACON controllers rotated one position per run, while the TMC remained at the designated TMC station.Half of the participants recently retired from P50 and the others recently retired from Southern California TRACON (SCT).The participants with SCT experiences were able to learn Phoenix operations with minimal training.
Scenarios and test conditionsScenarios were developed and the simulation was conducted on the Multi-Aircraft Control System (MACS) HITL simulation capability [17].The scenarios were set at the Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport (PHX) in Phoenix, Arizona.The airspace included the surrounding TRACON airspace (P50).The airport was configured for West Flow operations, with arrival traffic landing on runways 25L and 26, assuming independent runway operations.Figure 1 shows the PHX airspace, the four primary arrival routes, and highlights the Feeder and Final sectors.Runway 26 is located north of runway 25L in the figure .Two heavy traffic scenarios were used for this study.One scenario simulated PHX morning traffic, with dense traffic on the Northeast route, and the other scenario represented PHX afternoon traffic, with dense traffic on the Southwest route.Both scenarios had a peak arrival rate of 91 aircraft per hour, an identical mixture of aircraft weight classes (large, heavy and 757), and all aircraft were flown under Instrument Flight Rules (IFR) and were PBN capable jet arrivals.Wind and weather conditions were not simulated.A 3 (disturbance type) x 3 (type of schedule adjustment) test matrix was used for the study.Each simulation run included one of three planned disturbance events that always occurred on the (North or South) side with the heaviest traffic flow.These were: 1) a missed-approach, 2) an unscheduled priority arrival due to a medical emergency, and 3) a series of late arrivals due to convective weather.One of three types of schedule adjustments were used to respond to these events: 1) automatic schedule adjustments made by a schedule adjustment algorithm, 2) manual schedule adjustments made by the TMC, or 3) no adjustments.In all three schedule adjustment conditions, the TMC facilitated the arrival operation by communicating with the four terminal controllers.Nine unique combinations of disturbance type and type of schedule adjustment were used for runs.Each of these nine combinations was used twice in Week 2 and twice again in Week 3. A total of 40 runs were conducted, including four baseline ones without disturbance events in the first week.Each run was about 70 minutes in length.
Description of disturbance eventsIn the experiment, controllers could experience one of three disturbance events: 1) a missed-approach, 2) an unscheduled priority arrival, or 3) a series of late arrivals.During the missed-approach event, the pilot informed the Final controller of a missed-approach after the aircraft was cleared for approach and before being transferred to the tower controller, a confederate position.The missed approach segments did not have PBN specifications.During the handling of this disturbance event the controllers often vectored several aircraft to create a gap in the arrival sequence to safely insert the missed-approach aircraft.The disturbance event of an unscheduled priority arrival entailed a Lifeguard (MEDEVAC) turbo-prop flight, approaching P50 from the North or the South under Visual Flight Rules (VFR) and declaring medical emergency.This was the only aircraft in the experiment without PBN capability.The controllers typically created a gap in the arrival stream to give the lifeguard flight the priority by either vectoring or slowing down other aircraft.During the series of late arrivals event, pilots reduced their Indicated Air Speed (IAS) to 230 knots as they descended to enter P50, and informed the Feeder controllers that they could not increase speed due to simulated turbulence.Only a single route per scenario was affected by this condition.This led to a series of late aircraft in one arrival flow, creating potential merge conflicts with on-time arrivals with the same scheduled runway that were coming from the other routes without convective weather.
Schedule adjustmentsArrival schedules were perturbed as controllers vectored and slowed aircraft in response to disturbance events.This forced the deviation of ETAs from STAs.Three schedule adjustment conditions were used to alter STAs in response to disturbance events affecting arrival operations.These were: (1) scheduled adjustments performed automatically by a schedule adjustment algorithm, (2) schedule adjustments performed manually by the TMC to expedite the return to nominal operations, and (3) no schedule adjustments to the disturbance events.The algorithm in the automated condition detects future in-trail spacing violations at the Final Approach Fix (FAF), or detects potential vectoring in the Final sectors.If the detected issue is not corrected within a set time period, the algorithm triggers schedule adjustments.The algorithm does not change an aircraft's scheduled runway when performing schedule adjustments.Additionally, the algorithm uses logic that allows schedule adjustments to impact only one runway.With this logic, if a disturbance event only affects arrivals to one of the two runways, a schedule adjustment's impact is limited to the aircraft scheduled to land on that runway.Details of this algorithm are published elsewhere [16].In the manual condition, the TMC was provided with Traffic Management Advisor (TMA) tools to adjust the schedule, allowing the TMC to create an arrival slot and to change an aircraft's scheduled runway.The TMC often created a strategy to handle the disturbance event, communicated this strategy to the controllers, and performed schedule adjustments using the computer-human interaction (CHI) tools for the affected aircraft after the controllers had started acting on the strategy.For example, the TMC could decide that a Lifeguard aircraft coming from the North could fit behind an identified aircraft, and ask the North Feeder to create a gap in the arrival stream behind the identified aircraft.The TMC could then use the tools to create a slot for the Lifeguard that was not originally considered in the schedule.Once the slot was created, the TMC could adjust the STAs for the Lifeguard and all the following aircraft landing on the same runway.The TMC could also assign the identified aircraft to the other runway, making room to fit the Lifeguard aircraft in its place.
Quantifying schedule nonconformanceThe schedule nonconformance, nc, of an arrival aircraft is based on the aircraft's schedule conformance error, which is the difference between STA and ETA at a schedule point (the FAF in this study).Compared to the Feeder controllers, the Final controllers have less airspace and assignable speed range to correct for schedule-conformance error.Therefore, nc is designed to emphasize schedule nonconformance near the FAF.nc also considers the update period of the ETA and the nominal transition time from the meter fix to each point along the flight path en-route to the FAF.Details of the characteristics of nc and equation for its calculation are published elsewhere [9,16].Nominal operations were defined in [16] as any value within the 97.5 th percentile of all nc from the four baseline runs (nc = 8.01).A perturbation in the schedule was then defined as when nc during operations exceeded the 8.01 threshold and remained above this threshold for longer than 120 seconds.When nc drops back to or below the threshold, recovery from the schedule perturbation has been achieved.
Quantifying operation stressTo analyze the impact of disturbance events on workload and assess system recovery based on type of schedule adjustment, perturbations in the schedule were compared with subjective workload at specific moments in time.Figures 2,3, and 4 show a visual comparison between (a) schedule nonconformance and (b) controller workload for Runway 26 during the same runs, containing late arrival disturbance events.Controller subjective workload was collected once every 5 minutes during each simulation run on a scale from 1 to 6, (low to high) using the workload assessment keypad, and was examined for periods of operation stress by the type of schedule adjustment performed.The highest mean workload rating during all nominal runs at all controller positions was 2.81 (SD = .75).Workload ratings that exceeded a score of 3 were coded as operation stress and ratings of 3 or less were classified as not stressed or recovered.For each position and each run, workload scores were examined chronologically, with a stress score being added to the stressed workload frequency; all consecutive stressed scores were considered part of the same stressed period (e.g. Figure 2b, Feeder).A stressed period continued until the workload rating dropped below 4, then it was added to the frequency of recovery instances.In some cases, recovery was never achieved (e.g. Figure 3b, Final).Multiple periods of stressed workload and recovery were possible per run (e.g. Figure 4b, Final).
Results
Workload and schedule nonconformanceCorrelation analyses were conducted on workload scores and schedule nonconformance.First, workload scores from all four controller positions were paired with the nc measure for their respective runways for the time at which the workload data were collected during the simulation (e.g., GEELA Feeder and Final workload scores at 540s into a scenario were paired with runway 25L nc scores at 540s into the same scenario).Raw data for nc were found to have a skew of 2.198 for aircraft arriving on PHX 26 and a skew of 3.700 for aircraft arriving on PHX 25L, thus a base 10 log transformation was used on the nc data to normalize the data prior to calculating the correlation (Figure 5).Correlation analyses revealed a strong, significant positive correlation between nc and controller workload for the runway 26 Final position (see Figure 5), r = .594,n = 367, p < .001.Moderate, significant positive correlations were found between nc and controller workload for the runway 26 Feeder (r = .433,n = 377, p < .001),runway 25L Final (r = .375,n = 374, p < .001),and runway 25L Feeder positions (r = .328,n = 375, p < .001).As schedule nonconformance increased, workload increased for all TRACON positions.Additional results provide further evidence suggesting a clear relationship between schedule nonconformance and controller workload.Here, the raw nc data for each runway used in the previous analysis was coded as stressed, or schedule perturbation, defined elsewhere [16], with a nc value greater than 8.01) or recovered (not stressed; nc value of 8.01 or less).A one-way between subjects analysis of variance (ANOVA) revealed a significant difference in the runway 26 Final controller workload such that moments of perturbed schedule nonconformance (M = 3.34, SD = .96)resulted in higher workload than moments of no stress or recovery (M = 2.36, SD = 1.01),F(1,365) = 58.019,p < .001.Runway 26 Feeder controller workload was also significantly higher for stressed conditions (M = 3.17, SD = 1.17) than for recovery conditions (M = 2.48, SD = .96),F(1,375) = 28.997,p < .001.The ANOVA also showed a marginally significant difference in runway 25L Final controller workload for nonconformance conditions, with workload during schedule perturbation (M = 2.97, SD = .81)being higher than workload during non-stressed conditions (M = 2.63, SD = 1.11),F(1,372) = 3.196, p = .075.Runway 25L Feeder controller workload was found to be marginally higher for stressed conditions (M = 2.89, SD = 1.06) than non-stressed conditions (M = 2.62, SD = .86),F(1,373) = 3.044, p = .082.
Operation stressFrequencies of workload stress and workload recovery instances were determined.Then, the ratio of the number of onsets of workload recovery to the number of onsets of stressed workload was calculated (Table 1).While Final controllers had the highest percentage of recovery (69.6%) from stressed workload under the no schedule adjustments condition, the frequencies of stressed workload instances were also the highest.The Feeder controllers had the highest percentage of recovery (72.2%) from stressed workload under the manual schedule adjustments condition.All controllers appeared to benefit equally under the automatic schedule adjustments condition (both Final and Feeder Positions recovered from stressed workload 65% of the time).
DiscussionWorkload and schedule nonconformance results show that as schedule nonconformance increases, controller workload for all positions increases.As seen in the ANOVAs, overall, controller workload becomes much higher once schedule nonconformance exceeds the threshold for normal operations.One possible effect of these results is seen with the controller interaction with the given automation aids.The participants reported that these aids, such as slot markers, are useful in reducing controller workload in nominal condition.When schedule nonconformance gets too large, these aids no longer provide useful information as they are based on STAs and aircraft are flying with ETAs that are much different from the STAs.In such situation, workload is no longer mitigated by the aids.Usefulness of these aids, including workload reduction, returns when schedule nonconformance is reduced back to the nominal range.Operation stress and recovery differences were observed across controller positions.Without schedule adjustments, the Feeder controllers appeared to have difficulty recovering from stressed situations while they recovered at a greater rate with both manual and automatic schedule adjustments.Final controllers also appeared to benefit from automatic and manual schedule adjustments, as reflected in the lower frequencies of stress instances and the relatively high recovery rates.Frequency of stressed workload instances decreased with both manual and automation schedule adjustments in the Final positions, suggesting that some schedule adjustment ability is useful in unburdening the Final controller.With manual adjustment, the TMC is more proactive in addressing disturbance events as they occur.They are able to plan with controllers and make schedule adjustments before the disturbance perturbs the schedule, which may result in the large percentage of recovery from stressed workload seen for Feeders in manual schedule adjustment.However, manual schedule adjustments could be planned and executed differently in similar situations since decisions are based on the individual TMC making the adjustments.In comparison, automation detects issues after schedule is perturbed, then triggers schedule updates if the detected issue is not resolved within a set period.The automation is designed to make similar schedule adjustments for similar situations.Automatic schedule adjustments seem to be more consistently capable of reducing controller workload than manual schedule adjustments when comparing the ratio of workload recoveries in Final and Feeder positions.This study demonstrates the importance of minimizing schedule perturbations and providing aids to the controllers during schedule updates from a human factors perspective.The results in this paper offer more support to the findings published elsewhere [16] suggesting that during disturbance events, offering some means of schedule adjustment is beneficial to the overall performance and resilience of scheduled PBN operations.Fig. 1 .1Fig. 1.Simulation airspace
Fig. 2 .2Fig. 2. (a) and (b) Schedule nonconformance and workload: Manual schedule adjustment (Runway 26)
Fig. 5 .5Fig. 5. Scatterplots of base 10 log of schedule nonconformance by controller workload for all TRACON positions across all conditions.
Table 1 .1Operation Stress.No Schedule AdjustmentsAutomatic ScheduleManual ScheduleAdjustmentsAdjustmentsFinalFeederFinalFeederFinalFeederFrequency of Stressed231017202018WorkloadFrequency of Workload16411131113RecoveriesRatio of Workload.696.400.647.650.550.722Recoveries
		
		

			
AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to express appreciation for support provided throughout this research by Fay C. chin, Deborah S. Ballinger, and all of the Simulation Laboratories and ATD-1 engineering team members.
			

			

				


	
		Rotorcraft in the Performance Based Navigation International Civil Aviation Organization Implementation
		
			AndrzejFellner
		
		
			RobertKonieczka
		
		10.2478/tar-2019-0005
	
	
		Transactions on Aerospace Research
		2545-2835
		
			2019
			1
			
			2008
			Walter de Gruyter GmbH
		
	
	Performance-based Navigation (PBN) Manual
	International Civil Aviation Organization, "Performance-based Navigation (PBN) Manual," Doc 9613, AN/937, 2008.



	
		Performance Based Navigation (PBN), untangling the airspace
		
			Faa
		
		
			June 2013
		
	
	FAA, "Performance Based Navigation (PBN), untangling the airspace", June 2013.



	
		Assessing the Benefits of NextGen Performance-Based Navigation
		
			SebastianTimar
		
		
			GeorgeHunter
		
		
			JosephPost
		
		10.2514/atcq.21.3.211
	
	
		Air Traffic Control Quarterly
		Air Traffic Control Quarterly
		1064-3818
		2472-5757
		
			21
			3
			
			June 2013
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA)
			Chicago, Illinois
		
	
	10th USA/
	S. Timar, G. Hunter, and J. Post, "Assessing the benefits of NextGen Performance Based Navigation (PBN)," 10th USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar, Chicago, Illinois, June 2013.



	
		FAA response to recommendations of the RTCA NextGen midterm implementation task force
		
			Faa
		
		
			January 2010
		
	
	FAA, "FAA response to recommendations of the RTCA NextGen midterm implementation task force," January 2010.



	
		Evaluation of the terminal area precision scheduling and spacing system for near-term NAS application
		
			JThipphavong
		
		
			HNSwenson
		
		
			LMartin
		
		
			PLin
		
		
			JNguyen
		
		10.1201/b12321-12
	
	
		Advances in Human Aspects of Aviation
		San Francisco
		
			CRC Press
			July 2012
			
		
	
	J. Thipphavong, H. N. Swenson, L. Martin, P. Lin, and J. Nguyen, "Evaluation of the terminal area precision scheduling and spacing system for near-term NAS application," 4th International Conference on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics, San Francisco, July 2012.



	
		Design and evaluation of the terminal area precision scheduling and spacing system
		
			HNSwenson
		
		
			JThipphavong
		
		
			ASadovsky
		
		
			LChen
		
		
			CSullivan
		
		
			LMartin
		
	
	
		9th USA/Europe ATM Seminar
		Berlin, Germany
		
			June 2011
		
	
	H. N. Swenson, J. Thipphavong, A. Sadovsky, L. Chen, C. Sullivan, L. Martin, "Design and evaluation of the terminal area precision scheduling and spacing system," 9th USA/Europe ATM Seminar, Berlin, Germany, June 2011.



	
		Evaluation of the Terminal Sequencing and Spacing system for Performance-Based Navigation arrivals
		
			JaneThipphavong
		
		
			JaewooJung
		
		
			HarrySwenson
		
		
			LynneMartin
		
		
			MelodyLin
		
		
			JimmyNguyen
		
		10.1109/dasc.2013.6712503
	
	
		2013 IEEE/AIAA 32nd Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC)
		Syracuse, New York
		
			IEEE
			October 2013
		
	
	32nd DASC
	J. Thipphavong, J. Jung, H. N. Swenson, L. Martin, M. Lin, and J. Nguyen, "Evaluation of the terminal sequencing and spacing system for performance-based navigation arrivals", 32nd DASC, Syracuse, New York, October 2013.



	
		Terminal Sequencing and Spacing (TSS)
		
			JaneThipphavong
		
		10.1109/icnsurv.2015.7121371
		MP130272
	
	
		2015 Integrated Communication, Navigation and Surveillance Conference (ICNS)
		
			IEEE
			June 2013
		
	
	MITRE Center for Advanced Aviation System Development, "Terminal Sequencing and Spacing (TSS) simulation 2 post analysis report," MP130272, June 2013.



	
		Assessing Relation between Performance of Schedule-Based Arrival Operation and Schedule Nonconformance
		
			JaewooJung
		
		
			JaneThipphavong
		
		
			LynneMartin
		
		10.2514/6.2014-2164
	
	
		14th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference
		Atlanta, Georgia
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			June 2014
		
	
	J. Jung, J. Thipphavong, and L. Martin, "Assessing relation between performance of schedule-based arrival operation and schedule nonconformance," AIAA Aviation conference, Atlanta, Georgia, June 2014.



	
		Resolving off-nominal situations in schedule-based terminal area operations: results from a humanin-the-loop simulation
		
			JMercer
		
		
			TJCallantine
		
		
			LMartin
		
	
	
		28th International Congress of the Aeronautical Sciences
		Brisbane, Australia
		
			September 2012
		
	
	J. Mercer, T. J. Callantine, and L. Martin, "Resolving off-nominal situations in schedule-based terminal area operations: results from a human- in-the-loop simulation," 28th International Congress of the Aeronautical Sciences, Brisbane, Australia, September 2012.



	
		Investigating the impact of off-nominal events on high-density &#x2018;green&#x2019; arrivals
		
			ToddJCallantine
		
		
			ChristopherCabrall
		
		
			MichaelKupfer
		
		
			LynneMartin
		
		
			JoeyMercer
		
		
			EverettAPalmer
		
		10.1109/dasc.2011.6096195
	
	
		2011 IEEE/AIAA 30th Digital Avionics Systems Conference
		Seattle, Washington
		
			IEEE
			October 2011
		
	
	T. J. Callantine, C. Cabrall, M. Kupfer, L. Martin, and E. A. Palmer, "Investigating the impact of off-nominal events on high-density 'green' arrivals," 30th DASC, Seattle, Washington, October 2011.



	
		Evaluation of an Arrival Coordinator Position in a Terminal Metering Environment
		
			MichaelKupfer
		
		
			JoeyMercer
		
		
			ToddJ. Callantine
		
		
			VimmyGujral
		
		
			AshleyGomez
		
		10.54941/ahfe100714
	
	
		Advances in Human Aspects of Transportation: Part II
		Krakow, Poland
		
			AHFE International
			July 2014
		
	
	M. Kupfer, J. Mercer, T. Callantine, V. Gujral, and A. Gomez, "Evaluation of an Arrival Coordinator Position in a Terminal Metering Environment," 5th International Conference on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics, Krakow, Poland, July 2014.



	
		Air traffic controllers' control strategies in the terminal area under off-nominal conditions
		
			LMartin
		
		
			JMercer
		
		
			TCallantine
		
		
			MKupfer
		
		
			CCabrall
		
		10.1201/b12321-64
	
	
		Advances in Human Aspects of Aviation
		San Francisco, CA
		
			CRC Press
			July 2012
			
		
	
	L. Martin, J. Mercer, T. Callantine, M. Kupfer, and C. Cabrall, "Air Traffic Controllers' Control Strategies in the Terminal Area under Off- Nominal Conditions," 4th International Conference on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics, San Francisco, CA, July 2012.



	
		Development and evaluation of the terminal precision scheduling and spacing system for off-nominal condition operations
		
			HNSwenson
		
		
			Jaewoo Jung
		
		
			JThipphavong
		
		
			Liang Chen
		
		
			LMartin
		
		
			JNguyen
		
		10.1109/dasc.2012.6382303
	
	
		2012 IEEE/AIAA 31st Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC)
		Williamsburg, Virginia
		
			IEEE
			October 2012
		
	
	31st DASC
	H. N. Swenson, J. Jung, J. Thipphavong, L. Chen, L. Martin, and J. Nguyen, "Development and evaluation of the terminal precision scheduling and spacing system for off-nominal condition operations," 31st DASC, Williamsburg, Virginia, October 2012.



	
		Modeling Off-Nominal Recovery in NextGen Terminal-Area Operations
		
			ToddJCallantine
		
		10.2514/6.2011-6537
	
	
		AIAA Modeling and Simulation Technologies Conference
		Portland, Oregon
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			August 2011
		
	
	T. J. Callantine, "Modeling off-nominal recovery in NextGen terminal area operations," AIAA Modeling and Simulation Technologies (MST) Conference, Portland, Oregon, August 2011.



	
		Assessing resilience of performance-based navigation arrival operations
		
			JJung
		
		
			SAVerma
		
		
			SJZelinski
		
		
			TEKozon
		
		
			LSturre
		
	
	
		Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar
		
			June 2015
			Lisbon, Portugal
		
	
	Eleventh USA
	J. Jung, S. A. Verma, S. J. Zelinski, T. E. Kozon, and L. Sturre, "Assessing resilience of performance-based navigation arrival operations," Eleventh USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar, Lisbon, Portugal, June 2015.



	
		MACS: A Simulation Platform for Today's and Tomorrow's Air Traffic Operations
		
			ThomasPrevot
		
		
			JoeyMercer
		
		10.2514/6.2007-6556
	
	
		AIAA Modeling and Simulation Technologies Conference and Exhibit
		Hilton Head, South Carolina
		
			American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
			August 2007
		
	
	T. Prevot, "MACS: A simulation platform for today's and tomorrow's air traffic operations," AIAA MST Conference and Exhibit, Hilton Head, South Carolina, August 2007.


				
			
		
	
